FEBRUARY 15z The rich have a superfluous
store of things which they do not need and which are, therefore, neglected
and wasted; while millions starve and are frozen to death for want of
them. If each retained possession only of what he needed, none would be
in want and all-would live in contentment. Ibi/t. FEBRUARY 16 As it is,
the rich are discontented no less than the poor. The poor man would become
a millionaire and the millionaire a multimillionaire. The poor are often
not satisfied when they get just enough to fill their stomachs; but they
are clearly entitled to it and society should makeit a point to see that
they get it. Ibid.

FEBRUARY 17 Our civilization, our culture, our Swaraj depend not
upon multiplying our wants-self-indulgence, but upon restricting our
~vants--self-denial.

YI, 6 Oct. 1921

FEBRUARY 18 We should be ashamed of resting, or having a square meal so
long as there is one able-bodied man or woman without work or food, YI,
5 Feb. 1925

FEBRUARY 19 I suggest we are thieves in a way, if I take anything that
I do not need for my own immediate use and keep it, I thieve it from
somebody else, sW, p. 3e4

FEBRUARY 20 I venture to suggest that it is the fundamental law of Nature,
without exception, that Nature produces enough for our wants from day
to day, and if only everybody took enough for himself and nothing more,
there 20

would be no pauperism in this world, there would be no man dying of
starvation in this world.

Ibid.

FEBRUARY 21 i am no socialist and I do not want to dispossess those who
have got possessions： but I do say that personally those of us who
want to see light out of darkness have to follow this rule. I do not
want to dispossess anybody. I should then be departing from the rule of
Ahimsa. If somebody else possesses more than I do, let him. But so far as
my own life has to be regulated, I dare not possess anything which I do
not Want. Ibid. FEBRUARY 22 In India we have got three millions of people
who have to be satisfied with one meal a day, and that meal consisting
of a chapati containing no fat in it and a pinch of salt. You and I have
no right to anything that we really have until these three millions are,
clothed and fed better. You and I, who ought to know better, must adjust
our wants, and even undergo voluntary starvation in 21

vrder that they may be nursed, fed, and clothed, . ~ ' .~ sw, p. 385
FEBRUARY 23 The golden rule , is resolutely to ~6fuse to have what
millions cannot. This ability to refuse will not descend upon us M1 of a
sudden. The first thing is to cultivate the mental,attitude that will not
have possession or facilities denied to millions, and the next immediate
thing is to rearrange our lives as fast as possible in accordance with
that mentality. Y I, ：~4 June 1926 FEBRUARY 24 One should eatnot .in
order to please the palate, but just to keep body going. When each organ
of sense subserves the body and through the body the soul, its special
relish disappears andthen alone does it begin to function in the way nature
intended it tO do. .Any number of experiments is too small and no sacrifice
too great for attaining this symphony with natffre. Auto, p. 392 22

FEBRUARY 25 We want healers of souls rather than of bodies. The multiplicity
of hospitals and medical men is no sign of true civilization. The less
we and others pamper our bodies the better for us and the world. 17,
29 Sept. 1927 FEBRUARY 26 Instead of using the body as a temple of God
we use it as a vehicle for indulgences and are not ashamed to run to
medical men for help in our effort to increase them and abuse the earthly
tabernacle. YI, 8 Aug. 1929 FEBRUARY 27 Man's nature is not .essentially
evil. Brute nature has been known to yield to the influence of love. You
must never despair of human nature. H, 5 Nov. 1938 FEBRUARY 28 Man's
estate is one of probation. During that period he is played upon by evil
forces as well as good. He is ever prey to 23

temptations. He has to pro~ce his manliness by resisting and fighting
temptations. H, 4 April 1936 FEBRUARY 29 It may be long before the law
of love will be recognized in international affairs. The machineries of
governments stand between and hide the hearts of one people from those of
another, rI, 23 June 1919 MARCH 1 Truth is like a vast tree, which yields
more and more fruit, the more you nurture it. The deeper the search in
the mine of Truth the richer the discovery of the gems buffed there,
in the shape of openings for an ever greater variety of service. Auto,
p. 218 MARCH 2 The seeker after Truth should be humbier than the dust. The
world crushes the dust under its feet, but the seeker after Truth should
so humble himself that even the 24

dust could crush him. Only then, and not until then, will he have a glimpse
of truth. Ibid., p. XVI MARCH 3 Devotion to Truth is the sole reason, for
our existence. All our activities should be centred in Truth. Truth should
be the very breath of our life. When once this stage in the pilgrim's
progress is reached, all other rules of correct living will come without
effort, and obedience to them will be instinctive. But without Truth it
would be impossible to observe any principles or rules in life. TI, 30
July 1931 MARCH 4 There should be Truth in thought, Truth in speech, and
Truth in action. To the man who has realized this Truth in, perfection,
nothing else remains to be known, because all knowledge is necessarily
included in it. What is not included in it is not Truth and so not true
knowledge~ and there can be no inward peace without the true knowledge. If
we once learn how to apply this never-failing test of Truth. 25

we ~wil,1 at once be able to find out what is worth~ being, what is worth
seeing and what is worth reading. Ibid. MARCH 5 ~The quest Qf Truth involves
tapas-~e!f-suffering, sometin~s even unto death. There can be no place in
it for even a trace of self-inte¢est. In such selfless search for Truth
nobody ,can lose his bearings for long. Directly dne takes to the wrong
path one ~stumbles and is thus redirected to the right path. Therefore
the pursuit of Truth is ,true bhakti (devotion). It is the path that leads
to God and therefore there is no place in it for cowardice, no place for
defeat. It is the talisman by which death itself becomes the portal to
life eternal. Yy, 30 yuty 1931 MARCH 6 It is not given to man to know the
whole Truth. His duty lies in !lying up to the Truth as he sees it and
in doing so to resort xo the purest means, i.e., to non-violence. J-I,
24 Xov. 1933 26

MARCH 7 If observance of Truth was a bed of roses, if Truth cost one
nothing and was all happiness and ease, there would be~ no beauty about
it, We must adhere to Truth even if the heav, ens should fall. YI, 27
Sept. 1928 MARCH 8 Only Truth quenches untruth, Love quenches anger,
self-suffering quenches violence. This eternal rule is a rule not for
saints only but for all. Those who observe it may be few but they are the
salt of the earth, it is they who keep the society together, not those who
sin against light and truth., H, 1 Feb. 1942 MARCH 9 Abstract Truth has no
value, unless it incarnates in human beings who represent it by proving
their readiness to die for it. Our wrongs live because we only pretend
to be their living representatives. The only way we can prove our claim
is by readiness to suffer in the discharge of our trust. YI, 22 Dec. 1921
