The Cloud of Unknowing
Author(s):

Anonymous (14th. c. English)

Publisher:

Grand Rapids: Christian Classics Ethereal Library

Description:

Subjects:

Some things never change, including the human need to
connect with our creator. Prayer and meditation on the divine
are techniques that have been used for millennia to grow in
the knowledge of God. Cloud of Unknowing documents
techniques used by the medieval monastic community to
build and maintain that contemplative knowledge of God.
Scholars date the anonymous authorship of Cloud of Unknowing to 1375, during the height of European monasticism.
Written as a primer for the young monastic, the work is instructional, but does not have an austere didactic tone.
Rather, the work embraces the reader with a maternal call
to grow closer to God through meditation and prayer.
Andrew Hanson
CCEL Intern
Practical theology
Practical religion. The Christian life
Mysticism

i

Contents

Title Page

1

Introduction

2

Glossary

12

Prayer

14

Prologue

15

Table of the Chapters

16

Chapter 1: Of four degrees of Christian men's living, and of the course of his calling
that this book was made unto

24

Chapter 2: A short stirring to meekness, and to the work of this book

25

Chapter 3: How the work of this book shall be wrought and of the worthiness of it
before all other works

26

Chapter 4: Of the shortness of this work, and how it may not be come to by the
curiosity of wit, nor by imagination

27

Chapter 5: That in the time of this work all the creatures that ever have been, be
now, or ever shall be, and all the works of those same creatures, should be hid under
the cloud of forgetting

30

Chapter 6: A short conceit of the work of this book, treated by question

31

Chapter 7: How a man shall have him in this work against all thoughts, and specially
against all those that arise of his own curiosity, of cunning, and of natural wit

32

Chapter 8: That in the time of his work all the creatures that ever have been, be now,
or ever shall be, and all the works of those creatures, should be hid under the cloud
of forgetting

34

Chapter 9: That in the time of this work the rememberance of the holiest creature
that ever God made letteth more than it profiteth

37

Chapter 10: How a man shall know when his thought is no sin; and if it be sin, when
it is deadly and when it is venial.

39

Chapter 11: That a man should weigh each thought and each stirring after that it is,
and always eschew recklessness in venial sin.

41

ii

Chapter 12: That by Virtue of this word sin is not only destroyed, but also virtues
begotten.

42

Chapter 13: What meekness is in itself, and when it is perfect and when it is imperfect.

43

Chapter 14: That without imperfect meekness coming before, it is impossible for a
sinner to come to the perfect Virtue of meekness in this life

44

Chapter 15: A short proof against their error that say, that there is no perfecter cause
to be meeked under, than is the knowledge of a man's own wretchedness

45

Chapter 16: That by virtue of this work a sinner truly turned and called to
contemplation cometh sooner to perfection than by any other work; and by it soonest
may get of God forgiveness of sins

46

Chapter 17: That a very contemplative list not meddle him with active life, nor of
anything that is done or spoken about him, nor yet to answer to his blamers in
excusing of himself

48

Chapter 18: How that yet unto this day all actives complain of contemplatives as
Martha did of Mary. Of the which complaining ignorance is the cause

49

Chapter 19: A short excusation of him that made this book, teaching how all
contemplatives should have all actives fully excused of their complaining words and
deeds

50

Chapter 20: How Almighty God will goodly answer for all those that for the excusing
of themselves list not leave their business about the love of Him

51

Chapter 21: The true exposition of this gospel word, 'Mary hath chosen the best
part'

52

Chapter 22: Of the wonderful love that Christ had to man in person of all sinners
truly turned and called to the grace of contemplation

54

Chapter 23: How God will answer and purvey for them in spirit, that for business
about His love list not answer nor purvey for themselves

55

Chapter 24: What charity is in itself, and how it is truly and perfectly contained in
the work of this book

56

Chapter 25: That in the time of this work a perfect soul hath no special beholding
to any one man in this life

57

Chapter 26: That without full special grace, or long use in common grace, the work
of this book is right travailous; and in this work, which is the work of the soul helped
by grace, and which is the work of only God

58

Chapter 27: Who should work in the gracious work of this book

59

Chapter 28: That a man should not presume to work in this work before the time
that he be lawfully cleansed in conscience of all his special deeds of sin

60

iii

Chapter 29: That a man should bidingly travail in this work, and suffer the pain
thereof, and judge no man

61

Chapter 30: Who should blame and condemn other men's defaults

62

Chapter 31: How a man should have him in beginning of this work against all
thoughts and stirrings of sin

63

Chapter 32: Of two ghostly devices that be helpful to a ghostly beginner in the work
of this book

64

Chapter 33: That in this work a soul is cleansed both of his special sins and of the
pain of them, and yet how there is no perfect rest in this life

65

Chapter 34: That God giveth this grace freely without any means, and that it may
not be come to with means

66

Chapter 35: Of three means in the which a contemplative prentice should be
occupied; in reading, thinking, and praying

68

Chapter 36: Of the meditations of them that continually travail in the work of this
book

69

Chapter 37: Of the special prayers of them that be continual workers in the work of
this book

70

Chapter 38: How and why that short prayer pierceth heaven

71

Chapter 39: How a perfect worker shall pray, and what prayer is in itself; and, if a
man shall pray in words, which words accord them most to the property of prayer

72

Chapter 40: That in the time of this work a soul hath no special beholding to any
vice in itself nor to any virtue in itself

73

Chapter 41: That in all other works beneath this, men should keep discretion; but
in this none

74

Chapter 42: That by indiscretion in this, men shall keep discretion in all other things;
and surely else never

75

Chapter 43: That all writing and feeling of a man's own being must needs be lost if
the perfection of this work shall verily be felt in any soul in this life

76

Chapter 44: How a soul shall dispose it on its own part, for to destroy all witting
and feeling of its own being

77

Chapter 45: A good declaring of some certain deceits that may befall in this work

79

Chapter 46: A good teaching how a man shall flee these deceits, and work more with
a listiness of spirit than with any boisterousness of body

81

Chapter 47: A slight teaching of this work in purity of spirit; declaring how that on
one manner a soul should shew his desire unto God, and on ye contrary, unto man

82

iv

Chapter 48: How God will be served both with body and with soul, and reward men
in both; and how men shall know when all those sounds and sweetness that fall into
the body in time of prayer be both good and evil

84

Chapter 49: The substance of all perfection is nought else but a good will; and how
that all sounds and comforts and sweetness that may befall in this life be to it but
as it were accidents

86

Chapter 50: Which is chaste love; and how in some creatures such sensible comforts
be but seldom, and in some right oft

87

Chapter 51: That men should have great wariness so that they understand not bodily
a thing that is meant ghostly; and specially it is good to be wary in understanding
of this word in, and of this word up

88

Chapter 52: How these young presumptuous disciples misunderstand this word in,
and of the deceits that follow thereon

90

Chapter 53: Of divers unseemly practices that follow them that lack the work of this
book

91

Chapter 54: How that by virtue of this work a man is governed full wisely, and made
full seemly as well in body as in soul

93

Chapter 55: How they be deceived that follow the fervour of spirit in condemning
of some without discretion

95

Chapter 56: How they be deceived that follow the fervour of spirit in condemning
of some without discretion

97

Chapter 57: How these young presumptuous disciples misunderstand this other
word up; and of the deceits that follow thereon

98

Chapter 58: That a man shall not take ensample of Saint Martin and of Saint Stephen,
for to strain his imagination bodily upwards in the time of his prayer

99

Chapter 59: That a man shall not take ensample at the bodily ascension of Christ,
for to strain his imagination upwards bodily in the time of prayer: and that time,
place, and body, these three should be forgotten in all ghostly working

101

Chapter 60: That the high and the next way to heaven is run by desires, and not by
paces of feet

102

Chapter 61: That all bodily thing is subject unto ghostly thing, and is ruled thereafter
by the course of nature, and not contrariwise

103

Chapter 62: How a man may wit when his ghostly work is beneath him or without
him and when it is even with him or within him, and when it is above him and under
his God

104

v

Chapter 63: Of the powers of a soul in general, and how Memory in special is a
principal power comprehending in it all the other powers and all those things in
the which they work

105

Chapter 64: Of the other two principal powers, Reason and Will, and of the work
of them before sin and after

106

Chapter 65: Of the first secondary power, Imagination by name; and of the works
and of the obedience of it unto Reason, before sin and after

107

Chapter 66: Of the other secondary power, Sensuality by name; and of the works
and of the obedience of it unto Will, before sin and after

108

Chapter 67: That whoso knoweth not the powers of a soul and the manner of her
working, may lightly be deceived in understanding of ghostly words and of ghostly
working; and how a soul is made a God in grace

109

Chapter 68: That nowhere bodily, is everywhere ghostly; and how our outer man
calleth the work of this book nought

111

Chapter 69: How that a man's affection is marvelously changed in ghostly feeling
of this nought, when it is nowhere wrought

112

Chapter 70: That right as by the defailing of our bodily wits we begin more readily
to come to knowing of ghostly things, so by the defailing of our ghostly wits we
begin most readily to come to the knowledge of God, such as is possible by grace to
be had here

113

Chapter 71: That some may not come to feel the perfection of this work but in time
of ravishing, and some may have it when they will, in the common state of man's
soul

115

Chapter 72: That a worker in this work should not deem nor think of another worker
as he feeleth in himself

116

Chapter 73: How that after the likeness of Moses, of Bezaleel and of Aaron meddling
them about the Ark of the Testament, we profit on three manners in this grace of
contemplation, for this grace is figured in that Ark

117

Chapter 74: How that the matter of this book is never more read or spoken, nor
heard read or spoken, of a soul disposed thereto without feeling of a very accordance
to the effect of the same work: and of rehearsing of the same charge that is written
in the prologue

118

Chapter 75: Of some certain tokens by the which a man may prove whether he be
called of God to work in this work

119

Indexes

121

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

122
vi

This PDF file is from the Christian Classics Ethereal Library, www.ccel.org. The mission of
the CCEL is to make classic Christian books available to the world.
• This book is available in PDF, HTML, ePub, Kindle, and other formats. See
http://www.ccel.org/ccel/anonymous2/cloud.html.
• A free audio narration is available at http://www.ccel.org/ccel/anonymous2/cloud/mp3.
• Discuss this book online at http://www.ccel.org/node/3033.
The CCEL makes CDs of classic Christian literature available around the world through the
Web and through CDs. We have distributed thousands of such CDs free in developing
countries. If you are in a developing country and would like to receive a free CD, please
send a request by email to cd-request@ccel.org.
The Christian Classics Ethereal Library is a self supporting non-profit organization at
Calvin College. If you wish to give of your time or money to support the CCEL, please visit
http://www.ccel.org/give.
This PDF file is copyrighted by the Christian Classics Ethereal Library. It may be freely
copied for non-commercial purposes as long as it is not modified. All other rights are reserved. Written permission is required for commercial use.

vii

Title Page

A BOOK OF CONTEMPLATION THE WHICH IS CALLED
THE CLOUD OF UNKNOWING, IN THE WHICH A SOUL IS
ONED WITH GOD
Edited from the British Museum MS. Harl. 674
With an Introduction
BY

EVELYN UNDERHILL
SECOND EDITION

London
JOHN M. WATKINS
21 Cecil Court, Charing Cross Road
1922

1

Introduction

INTRODUCTION
5

THE little family of mystical treatises which is known to students as “the Cloud of Unknowing
group,” deserves more attention than it has hitherto received from English lovers of mysticism: for it represents the first expression in our own tongue of that great mystic tradition
of the Christian Neoplatonists which gathered up, remade, and “salted with Christ’s salt”
all that was best in the spiritual wisdom of the ancient world.
That wisdom made its definite entrance into the Catholic fold about A.D. 500, in
the writings of the profound and nameless mystic who chose to call himself “Dionysius the
Areopagite.” Three hundred and fifty years later, those writings were translated into Latin
by John Scotus Erigena, a scholar at the court of Charlemagne, and so became available to
the ecclesiastical world of the West. Another five hundred years elapsed, during which their
influence was felt, and felt strongly, by the mystics of every European country: by St. Bernard,
the Victorines, St. Bonaventura, St. Thomas Aquinas. Every reader of Dante knows the part
which they play in the Paradiso. Then, about the middle of the 14th century, England—at
that time in the height of her great mystical period—led the way with the first translation
into the vernacular of the Areopagite’s work. In Dionise Hid Divinite, a version of the Mystica
Theologia, this spiritual treasure-house was first made accessible to those outside the professionally religious class. Surely this is a fact which all lovers of mysticism, all “spiritual patriots,” should be concerned to hold in remembrance.
It is supposed by most scholars that Dionise Hid Divinite, which—appearing as it
did in an epoch of great spiritual vitality—quickly attained to a considerable circulation, is
by the same hand which wrote the Cloud of Unknowing and its companion books; and that
this hand also produced an English paraphrase of Richard of St. Victor’s Benjamin Minor,
another work of much authority on the contemplative life. Certainly the influence of Richard
is only second to that of Dionysius in this unknown mystic’s own work—work, however,
which owes as much to the deep personal experience, and extraordinary psychological gifts
of its writer, as to the tradition that he inherited from the past.
Nothing is known of him; beyond the fact, which seems clear from his writings,
that he was a cloistered monk devoted to the contemplative life. It has been thought that he
was a Carthusian. But the rule of that austere order, whose members live in hermit-like seclusion, and scarcely meet except for the purpose of divine worship, can hardly have afforded
him opportunity of observing and enduring all those tiresome tricks and absurd mannerisms
of which he gives so amusing and realistic a description in the lighter passages of the Cloud.
These passages betray the half-humorous exasperation of the temperamental recluse, nervous,
fastidious, and hypersensitive, loving silence and peace, but compelled to a daily and hourly
companionship with persons of a less contemplative type: some finding in extravagant and
2

Introduction

meaningless gestures an outlet for suppressed vitality; others overflowing with a terrible
cheerfulness like “giggling girls and nice japing jugglers”; others so lacking in repose that
they “can neither sit still, stand still, nor lie still, unless they be either wagging with their
feet or else somewhat doing with their hands.” Though he cannot go to the length of condemning these habits as mortal sins, the author of the Cloud leaves us in no doubt as to the
irritation with which they inspired him, or the distrust with which he regards the spiritual
claims of those who fidget.
The attempt to identify this mysterious writer with Walter Hilton, the author of
The Scale of Perfection, has completely failed: though Hilton’s work—especially the exquisite
fragment called the Song of Angels—certainly betrays his influence. The works attributed to
him, if we exclude the translations from Dionysius and Richard of St. Victor, are only five
in number. They are, first, The Cloud of Unknowing—the longest and most complete exposition of its author’s peculiar doctrine—and, depending from it, four short tracts or letters:
The Epistle of Prayer, The Epistle of Discretion in the Stirrings of the Soul, The Epistle of Privy
Counsel, and The Treatise of Discerning of Spirits. Some critics have even disputed the claim
of the writer of the Cloud to the authorship of these little works, regarding them as the
production of a group or school of contemplatives devoted to the study and practice of the
Dionysian mystical theology; but the unity of thought and style found in them makes this
hypothesis at least improbable. Everything points rather to their being the work of an original mystical genius, of strongly marked character and great literary ability: who, whilst he
took the framework of his philosophy from Dionysius the Areopagite, and of his psychology
from Richard of St. Victor, yet is in no sense a mere imitator of these masters, but introduced
a genuinely new element into mediaeval religious literature.
What, then, were his special characteristics? Whence came the fresh colour which
he gave to the old Platonic theory of mystical experience? First, I think, from the combination
of high spiritual gifts with a vivid sense of humour, keen powers of observation, a robust
common-sense: a balance of qualities not indeed rare amongst the mystics, but here
presented to us in an extreme form. In his eager gazing on divinity this contemplative never
loses touch with humanity, never forgets the sovereign purpose of his writings; which is not
a declaration of the spiritual favours he has received, but a helping of his fellow-men to
share them. Next, he has a great simplicity of outlook, which enables him to present the
result of his highest experiences and intuitions in the most direct and homely language. So
actual, and so much a part of his normal existence, are his apprehensions of spiritual reality,
that he can give them to us in the plain words of daily life: and thus he is one of the most
realistic of mystical writers. He abounds in vivid little phrases—“Call sin a lump”: “Short
prayer pierceth heaven”: “Nowhere bodily, is everywhere ghostly”: “Who that will not go
the strait way to heaven, . . . shall go the soft way to hell.” His range of experience is a wide
one. He does not disdain to take a hint from the wizards and necromancers on the right
3

Introduction

way to treat the devil; he draws his illustrations of divine mercy from the homeliest incidents
of friendship and parental love. A skilled theologian, quoting St. Augustine and Thomas
Aquinas, and using with ease the language of scholasticism, he is able, on the other hand,
to express the deepest speculations of mystical philosophy without resorting to academic
terminology: as for instance where he describes the spiritual heaven as a “state” rather than
a “place”:
“For heaven ghostly is as nigh down as up, and up as down: behind as before, before
as behind, on one side as other. Insomuch, that whoso had a true desire for to be at heaven,
then that same time he were in heaven ghostly. For the high and the next way thither is run
by desires, and not by paces of feet.”
His writings, though they touch on many subjects, are chiefly concerned with the
art of contemplative prayer; that “blind intent stretching to God” which, if it be wholly set
on Him, cannot fail to reach its goal. A peculiar talent for the description and discrimination
of spiritual states has enabled him to discern and set before us, with astonishing precision
and vividness, not only the strange sensations, the confusion and bewilderment of the beginner in the early stages of contemplation—the struggle with distracting thoughts, the silence, the dark—and the unfortunate state of those theoretical mystics who, “swollen with
pride and with curiosity of much clergy and letterly cunning as in clerks,” miss that treasure
which is “never got by study but all only by grace”; but also the happiness of those whose
“sharp dart of longing love” has not “failed of the prick, the which is God.”
A great simplicity characterises his doctrine of the soul’s attainment of the Absolute.
For him there is but one central necessity: the perfect and passionate setting of the will upon
the Divine, so that it is “thy love and thy meaning, the choice and point of thine heart.” Not
by deliberate ascetic practices, not by refusal of the world, not by intellectual striving, but
by actively loving and choosing, by that which a modern psychologist has called “the synthesis of love and will” does the spirit of man achieve its goal. “For silence is not God,” he
says in the Epistle of Discretion, “nor speaking is not God; fasting is not God, nor eating is
not God; loneliness is not God, nor company is not God; nor yet any of all the other two
such contraries. He is hid between them, and may not be found by any work of thy soul,
but all only by love of thine heart. He may not be known by reason, He may not be gotten
by thought, nor concluded by understanding; but He may be loved and chosen with the
true lovely will of thine heart. . . . Such a blind shot with the sharp dart of longing love may
never fail of the prick, the which is God.”
To him who has so loved and chosen, and “in a true will and by an whole intent
does purpose him to be a perfect follower of Christ, not only in active living, but in the
sovereignest point of contemplative living, the which is possible by grace for to be come to
in this present life,” these writings are addressed. In the prologue of the Cloud of Unknowing
we find the warning, so often prefixed to mediaeval mystical works, that it shall on no account
4

Introduction

be lent, given, or read to other men: who could not understand, and might misunderstand
in a dangerous sense, its peculiar message. Nor was this warning a mere expression of literary
vanity. If we may judge by the examples of possible misunderstanding against which he is
careful to guard himself, the almost tiresome reminders that all his remarks are “ghostly,
not bodily meant,” the standard of intelligence which the author expected from his readers
was not a high one. He even fears that some “young presumptuous ghostly disciples” may
understand the injunction to “lift up the heart” in a merely physical manner; and either
“stare in the stars as if they would be above the moon,” or “travail their fleshly hearts outrageously in their breasts” in the effort to make literal “ascensions” to God. Eccentricities
of this kind he finds not only foolish but dangerous; they outrage nature, destroy sanity and
health, and “hurt full sore the silly soul, and make it fester in fantasy feigned of fiends.” He
observes with a touch of arrogance that his book is not intended for these undisciplined
seekers after the abnormal and the marvellous, nor yet for “fleshly janglers, flatterers and
blamers, . . . nor none of these curious, lettered, nor unlearned men.” It is to those who feel
themselves called to the true prayer of contemplation, to the search for God, whether in the
cloister or the world—whose “little secret love” is at once the energizing cause of all action,
and the hidden sweet savour of life—that he addresses himself. These he instructs in that
simple yet difficult art of recollection, the necessary preliminary of any true communion
with the spiritual order, in which all sensual images, all memories and thoughts, are as he
says, “trodden down under the cloud of forgetting” until “nothing lives in the working mind
but a naked intent stretching to God.” This “intent stretching”—this loving and vigorous
determination of the will—he regards as the central fact of the mystical life; the very heart
of effective prayer. Only by its exercise can the spirit, freed from the distractions of memory
and sense, focus itself upon Reality and ascend with “a privy love pressed” to that “Cloud
of Unknowing”—the Divine Ignorance of the Neoplatonists—wherein is “knit up the ghostly
knot of burning love betwixt thee and thy God, in ghostly onehead and according of will.”
There is in this doctrine something which should be peculiarly congenial to the
activistic tendencies of modern thought. Here is no taint of quietism, no invitation to a
spiritual limpness. From first to last glad and deliberate work is demanded of the initiate:
an all-round wholeness of experience is insisted on. “A man may not be fully active, but if
he be in part contemplative; nor yet fully contemplative, as it may be here, but if he be in
part active.” Over and over again, the emphasis is laid on this active aspect of all true spirituality—always a favourite theme of the great English mystics. “Love cannot be lazy,” said
Richard Rolle. So too for the author of the Cloud energy is the mark of true affection. “Do
forth ever, more and more, so that thou be ever doing. . . . Do on then fast; let see how thou
bearest thee. Seest thou not how He standeth and abideth thee?”
True, the will alone, however ardent and industrious, cannot of itself set up communion with the supernal world: this is “the work of only God, specially wrought in what soul
5

Introduction

that Him liketh.” But man can and must do his part. First, there are the virtues to be acquired:
those “ornaments of the Spiritual Marriage” with which no mystic can dispense. Since we
can but behold that which we are, his character must be set in order, his mind and heart
made beautiful and pure, before he can look on the triple star of Goodness, Truth, and
Beauty, which is God. Every great spiritual teacher has spoken in the same sense: of the need
for that which Rolle calls the “mending of life”—regeneration, the rebuilding of character—as
the preparation of the contemplative act.
For the author of the Cloud all human virtue is comprised in the twin qualities of
Humility and Charity. He who has these, has all. Humility, in accordance with the doctrine
of Richard of St. Victor, he identifies with self-knowledge; the terrible vision of the soul as
it is, which induces first self-abasement and then self-purification—the beginning of all
spiritual growth, and the necessary antecedent of all knowledge of God. “Therefore swink
and sweat in all that thou canst and mayst, for to get thee a true knowing and a feeling of
thyself as thou art; and then I trow that soon after that, thou shalt have a true knowing and
a feeling of God as He is.”
As all man’s feeling and thought of himself and his relation to God is comprehended
in Humility, so all his feeling and thought of God in Himself is comprehended in Charity;
the self-giving love of Divine Perfection “in Himself and for Himself” which Hilton calls
“the sovereign and the essential joy.” Together these two virtues should embrace the sum
of his responses to the Universe; they should govern his attitude to man as well as his attitude
to God. “Charity is nought else . . . but love of God for Himself above all creatures, and of
man for God even as thyself.”
Charity and Humility, then, together with the ardent and industrious will, are the
necessary possessions of each soul set upon this adventure. Their presence it is which marks
out the true from the false mystic: and it would seem, from the detailed, vivid, and often
amusing descriptions of the sanctimonious, the hypocritical, the self-sufficient, and the selfdeceived in their “diverse and wonderful variations,” that such a test was as greatly needed
in the “Ages of Faith” as it is at the present day. Sham spirituality flourished in the mediaeval
cloister, and offered a constant opportunity of error to those young enthusiasts who were
not yet aware that the true freedom of eternity “cometh not with observation.” Affectations
of sanctity, pretense to rare mystical experiences, were a favourite means of advertisement.
Psychic phenomena, too, seem to have been common: ecstasies, visions, voices, the scent
of strange perfumes, the hearing of sweet sounds. For these supposed indications of Divine
favour, the author of the Cloud has no more respect than the modern psychologist: and
here, of course, he is in agreement with all the greatest writers on mysticism, who are unanimous in their dislike and distrust of all visionary and auditive experience. Such things, he
considers, are most often hallucination: and, where they are not, should be regarded as the
accidents rather than the substance of the contemplative life—the harsh rind of sense, which
6

Introduction

covers the sweet nut of “pure ghostliness.” Were we truly spiritual, we should not need them;
for our communion with Reality would then be the direct and ineffable intercourse of like
with like.
Moreover, these automatism are amongst the most dangerous instruments of selfdeception. “Ofttimes,” he says of those who deliberately seek for revelations, “the devil
feigneth quaint sounds in their ears, quaint lights and shining in their eyes, and wonderful
smells in their noses: and all is but falsehood.” Hence it often happens to those who give
themselves up to such experiences, that “fast after such a false feeling, cometh a false
knowing in the Fiend’s school: . . . for I tell thee truly, that the devil hath his contemplatives,
as God hath His.” Real spiritual illumination, he thinks, seldom comes by way of these
psycho-sensual automatism “into the body by the windows of our wits.” It springs up
within the soul in “abundance of ghostly gladness.” With so great an authority it comes,
bringing with it such wonder and such love, that “he that feeleth it may not have it suspect.”
But all other abnormal experiences—“comforts, sounds and gladness, and sweetness, that
come from without suddenly”—should be set aside, as more often resulting in frenzies and
feebleness of spirit than in genuine increase of “ghostly strength.”
This healthy and manly view of the mystical life, as a growth towards God, a right
employment of the will, rather than a short cut to hidden knowledge or supersensual experience, is one of the strongest characteristics of the writer of the Cloud; and constitutes perhaps
his greatest claim on our respect. “Mean only God,” he says again and again; “Press upon
Him with longing love”; “A good will is the substance of all perfection.” To those who have
this good will, he offers his teaching: pointing out the dangers in their way, the errors of
mood and of conduct into which they may fall. They are to set about this spiritual work not
only with energy, but with courtesy: not “snatching as it were a greedy greyhound” at spiritual satisfactions, but gently and joyously pressing towards Him Whom Julian of Norwich
called “our most courteous Lord.” A glad spirit of dalliance is more becoming to them than
the grim determination of the fanatic.
"Shall I, a gnat which dances in Thy ray,
Dare to be reverent.”
Further, he communicates to them certain “ghostly devices” by which they may
overcome the inevitable difficulties encountered by beginners in contemplation: the distracting thoughts and memories which torment the self that is struggling to focus all its attention
upon the spiritual sphere. The stern repression of such thoughts, however spiritual, he knows
to be essential to success: even sin, once it is repented of, must be forgotten in order that
Perfect Goodness may be known. The “little word God,” and “the little word Love,” are the
only ideas which may dwell in the contemplative’s mind. Anything else splits his attention,
and soon proceeds by mental association to lead him further and further from the consideration of that supersensual Reality which he seeks.
7

Introduction

The primal need of the purified soul, then, is the power of Concentration. His whole
being must be set towards the Object of his craving if he is to attain to it: “Look that nothing
live in thy working mind, but a naked intent stretching into God.” Any thought of Him is
inadequate, and for that reason defeats its own end—a doctrine, of course, directly traceable
to the “Mystical Theology” of Dionysius the Areopagite. “Of God Himself can no man
think,” says the writer of the Cloud, “And therefore I would leave all that thing that I can
think, and choose to my love that thing that I cannot think. “The universes which are
amenable to the intellect can never satisfy the instincts of the heart.”
Further, there is to be no wilful choosing of method: no fussy activity of the surfaceintelligence. The mystic who seeks the divine Cloud of Unknowing is to be surrendered to
the direction of his deeper mind, his transcendental consciousness: that “spark of the soul”
which is in touch with eternal realities. “Meddle thou not therewith, as thou wouldest help
it, for dread lest thou spill all. Be thou but the tree, and let it be the wright: be thou but the
house, and let it be the husbandman dwelling therein.”
In the Epistle of Privy Counsel there is a passage which expresses with singular
completeness the author’s theory of this contemplative art—this silent yet ardent encounter
of the soul with God. Prayer, said Mechthild of Magdeburg, brings together two lovers, God
and the soul, in a narrow room where they speak much of love: and here the rules which
govern that meeting are laid down by a master’s hand. “When thou comest by thyself,” he
says, “think not before what thou shalt do after, but forsake as well good thoughts as evil
thoughts, and pray not with thy mouth but list thee right well. And then if thou aught shalt
say, look not how much nor how little that it be, nor weigh not what it is nor what it bemeaneth . . . and look that nothing live in thy working mind but a naked intent stretching
into God, not clothed in any special thought of God in Himself. . . . This naked intent freely
fastened and grounded in very belief shall be nought else to thy thought and to thy feeling
but a naked thought and a blind feeling of thine own being: as if thou saidest thus unto God,
within in thy meaning, ‘That what I am, Lord, I offer unto Thee, without any looking to any
quality of Thy Being, but only that Thou art as Thou art, without any more.’ That meek
darkness be thy mirror, and thy whole remembrance. Think no further of thyself than I bid
thee do of thy God, so that thou be one with Him in spirit, as thus without departing and
scattering, for He is thy being, and in Him thou art that thou art; not only by cause and by
being, but also, He is in thee both thy cause and thy being. And therefore think on God in
this work as thou dost on thyself, and on thyself as thou dost on God: that He is as He is
and thou art as thou art, and that thy thought be not scattered nor departed, but proved in
Him that is All.”
The conception of reality which underlies this profound and beautiful passage, has
much in common with that found in the work of many other mystics; since it is ultimately
derived from the great Neoplatonic philosophy of the contemplative life. But the writer invests
8

Introduction

it, I think, with a deeper and wider meaning than it is made to bear in the writings even of
Ruysbroeck, St. Teresa, or St. John of the Cross. “For He is thy being, and in Him thou art
that thou art; not only by cause and by being, but also, He is in thee both thy cause and thy
being.” It was a deep thinker as well as a great lover who wrote this: one who joined hands
with the philosophers, as well as with the saints.
“That meek darkness be thy mirror.” What is this darkness? It is the “night of the
intellect” into which we are plunged when we attain to a state of consciousness which is
above thought; enter on a plane of spiritual experience with which the intellect cannot deal.
This is the “Divine Darkness”—the Cloud of Unknowing, or of Ignorance, “dark with excess
of light”—preached by Dionysius the Areopagite, and eagerly accepted by his English interpreter. “When I say darkness, I mean a lacking of knowing . . . and for this reason it is not
called a cloud of the air, but a cloud of unknowing that is betwixt thee and thy God.” It is
“a dark mist,” he says again, “which seemeth to be between thee and the light thou aspirest
to.” This dimness and lostness of mind is a paradoxical proof of attainment. Reason is in
the dark, because love has entered “the mysterious radiance of the Divine Dark, the inaccessible light wherein the Lord is said to dwell, and to which thought with all its struggles cannot
attain.”
“Lovers,” said Patmore, “put out the candles and draw the curtains, when they wish
to see the god and the goddess; and, in the higher communion, the night of thought is the
light of perception.” These statements cannot be explained: they can only be proved in the
experience of the individual soul. “Whoso deserves to see and know God rests therein,” says
Dionysius of that darkness, “and, by the very fact that he neither sees nor knows, is truly in
that which surpasses all truth and all knowledge.”
“Then,” says the writer of the Cloud—whispering as it were to the bewildered neophyte the dearest secret of his love—“then will He sometimes peradventure send out a beam
of ghostly light, piercing this cloud of unknowing that is betwixt thee and Him; and show
thee some of His privity, the which man may not, nor cannot speak.”
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Numerous copies of the Cloud of Unknowing and the other works attributed to its
writer are in existence. Six manuscripts of the Cloud are in the British Museum: four on
vellum (Harl. 674, Harl. 959, Harl. 2373, and Royal 17 C. xxvii.), all of the 15th century; and
two on paper (Royal 17 C. xxvii. of the 16th century, and Royal 17 D. v. late 15th century).
All these agree fairly closely; except for the facts that Harl. 2373 is incomplete, several pages
having disappeared, and that Harl. 959 gives the substance of the whole work in a slightly
shortened form. The present edition is based upon Harl. 674; which has been transcribed
and collated with Royal 17 C. xxvi., and in the case of specially obscure passages with Royal
17 C. xxvii., Royal 17 D. v., and Harl. 2373. Obvious errors and omissions have been corrected, and several obscure readings elucidated, from these sources.
9

Introduction

The Cloud of Unknowing was known, and read, by English Catholics as late as the
middle or end of the 17th century. It was much used by the celebrated Benedictine ascetic,
the Venerable Augustine Baker (1575-1641), who wrote a long exposition of the doctrine
which it contains. Two manuscripts of this treatise exist in the Benedictine College of St.
Laurence at Ampleforth; together with a transcript of the Cloud of Unknowing dated 1677.
Many references to it will also be found in the volume called Holy Wisdom, which contains
the substances of Augustine Baker’s writings on the inner life. The Cloud has only once been
printed: in 1871, by the Rev. Henry Collins, under the title of The Divine Cloud, with a
preface and notes attributed to Augustine Baker and probably taken from the treatise
mentioned above. This edition is now out of print. The MS. from which it was made is unknown to us. It differs widely, both in the matter of additions and of omissions, from all the
texts in the British Museum, and represents a distinctly inferior recension of the work. A
mangled rendering of the sublime Epistle of Privy Counsel is prefixed to it. Throughout, the
pithy sayings of the original are either misquoted, or expanded into conventional and flavourless sentences. Numerous explanatory phrases for which our manuscripts give no authority have been incorporated into the text. All the quaint and humorous turns of speech
are omitted or toned down. The responsibility for these crimes against scholarship cannot
now be determined; but it seems likely that the text from which Father Collins’ edition
was—in his own words—“mostly taken” was a 17th-century paraphrase, made rather in the
interests of edification than of accuracy; and that it represents the form in which the work
was known and used by Augustine Baker and his contemporaries.
The other works attributed to the author of the Cloud have fared better than this.
Dionise Hid Divinite still remains in MS.: but the Epistle of Prayer, the Epistle of Discretion,
and the Treatise of Discerning of Spirits, together with the paraphrase of the Benjamin Minor
of Richard of St. Victor which is supposed to be by the same hand, were included by Henry
Pepwell, in 1521, in a little volume of seven mystical tracts. These are now accessible to the
general reader; having been reprinted in the “New Medieval Library” (1910) under the title
of The Cell of Self-knowledge, with an admirable introduction and notes by Mr. Edmund
Gardner. Mr. Gardner has collated Pepwell’s text with that contained in the British Museum
manuscript Harl. 674; the same volume which has provided the base-manuscript for the
present edition of the Cloud.
This edition is intended, not for the student of Middle English, nor for the specialist
in mediaeval literature; but for the general reader and lover of mysticism. My object has
been to produce a readable text, free from learned and critical apparatus. The spelling has
therefore been modernised throughout: and except in a few instances, where phrases of a
special charm or quaintness, or the alliterative passages so characteristic of the author’s
style, demanded their retention, obsolete words have been replaced by their nearest modern
equivalents. One such word, however, which occurs constantly has generally been retained,
10

Introduction

on account of its importance and the difficulty of finding an exact substitute for it in current
English. This is the verb “to list,” with its adjective and adverb “listy” and “listily,” and the
substantive “list,” derived from it. “List” is best understood by comparison with its opposite,
“listless.” It implies a glad and eager activity, or sometimes an energetic desire or craving:
the wish and the will to do something. The noun often stands for pleasure or delight, the
adverb for the willing and joyous performance of an action: the “putting of one’s heart into
one’s work.” The modern “lust,” from the same root, suggests a violence which was expressly
excluded from the Middle English meaning of “list.”
My heartiest thanks are due to Mr. David Inward, who transcribed the manuscript
on which this version is based, and throughout has given me skilled and untiring assistance
in solving many of the problems which arose in connection with it; and to Mr. J. A. Herbert,
Assistant-keeper of Manuscripts in the British Museum, who has read the proofs, and also
dated the manuscripts of the Cloud for the purposes of the present edition, and to whose
expert knowledge and unfailing kindness I owe a deep debt of gratitude.
EVELYN UNDERHILL.
39

11

Glossary

Glossary
Beholding
Regard, consideration.
Boisterous
Rough, violent, unskilful, crude.
Clergy
Learning.
Con
To know, or be able.
Counsel
Spiritual adviser or director.
Doomsman
Judge.
Even-christian
Neighbour.
Fairhead
Beauty.
Forsobbed
Soaked or penetrated.
Forsunken
Immersed.
Let
To hinder.
Lewd
Unlettered, or ignorant.
Namely
Specially.
Onehead
Union.
Out!
Alas.
Pincher
A covetous or niggardly person.
Ravishing
Ecstasy.
Reckless

12

Glossary

Indifferent.
Ronker
A whisperer.
Ronner
A gossip or tale-bearer.
Swink
To labour.
Witting
Knowledge.
Wode
Mad, furious.

13

Prayer

Here beginneth a book of contemplation, the which is called the
CLOUD OF UNKNOWING, in the which a soul is oned with GOD.

41

43

Here Beginneth the Prayer on the Prologue
GOD, unto whom all hearts be open, and unto whom all will speaketh, and unto whom no
privy thing is hid. I beseech Thee so for to cleanse the intent of mine heart with the unspeakable gift of Thy grace, that I may perfectly love Thee, and worthily praise Thee. Amen.

14

Prologue

Here Beginneth the Prologue
45

IN the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost! I charge thee and I beseech
thee, with as much power and virtue as the bond of charity is sufficient to suffer, whatsoever
thou be that this book shalt have in possession, either by property, either by keeping, by
bearing as messenger, or else by borrowing, that in as much as in thee is by will and advisement, neither thou read it, nor write it, nor speak it, nor yet suffer it be read, written, or
spoken, of any or to any but if it be of such one, or to such one, that hath by thy supposing
in a true will and by an whole intent purposed him to be a perfect follower of Christ not
only in active living, but in the sovereignest point of contemplative living the which is possible
by grace for to be come to in this present life of a perfect soul yet abiding in this deadly body;
and thereto that doth that in him is, and by thy supposing hath done long time before, for
to able him to contemplative living by the virtuous means of active living. For else it accordeth nothing to him. And over this I charge thee and I beseech thee by the authority of
charity, that if any such shall read it, write it, or speak it, or else hear it be read or spoken,
that thou charge him as I do thee, for to take him time to read it, speak it, write it, or hear
it, all over. For peradventure there is some matter therein in the beginning or in the middle,
the which is hanging, and not fully declared where it standeth: and if it be not there, it is
soon after, or else in the end. Wherefore if a man saw one matter and not another, peradventure he might lightly be led into error; and therefore in eschewing of this error, both in
thyself and in all other, I pray thee for charity do as I say thee.
Fleshly janglers, open praisers and blamers of themselves or of any other, tellers of
trifles, ronners and tattlers of tales, and all manner of pinchers, cared I never that they saw
this book. For mine intent was never to write such thing unto them, and therefore I would
that they meddle not therewith; neither they, nor any of these curious, lettered, or unlearned
men. Yea, although that they be full good men of active living, yet this matter accordeth
nothing to them. But if it be to those men, the which although they stand in activity by
outward form of living, nevertheless yet by inward stirring after the privy spirit of God,
whose dooms be hid, they be full graciously disposed, not continually as it is proper to very
contemplatives, but now and then to be perceivers in the highest point of this contemplative
act; if such men might see it, they should by the grace of God be greatly comforted thereby.
This book is distinguished in seventy chapters and five. Of the which chapters, the
last chapter of all teacheth some certain tokens by the which a soul may verily prove
whether he be called of God to be a worker in this work or none.

15

Table of the Chapters

Here Beginneth a Table of the Chapters
49

THE FIRST CHAPTER
Of four degrees of Christian men’s living; and of the course of his calling that this book was made
unto
THE SECOND CHAPTER
A short stirring to meekness, and to the work of this book
THE THIRD CHAPTER
How the work of this book shall be wrought, and of the worthiness of it before all other works
THE FOURTH CHAPTER
Of the shortness of this work, and how it may not be come to by the curiosity of wit, nor by imagination
THE FIFTH CHAPTER
That in the time of this work all the creatures that ever have been, be now, or ever shall be, and all
the works of those same creatures, should be hid under the cloud of forgetting
THE SIXTH CHAPTER
A short conceit of the work of this book, treated by question
THE SEVENTH CHAPTER
How a man shall have him in this work against all thoughts, and specially against all those that arise
of his own curiosity, of cunning, and of natural wit
THE EIGHTH CHAPTER
A good declaring of certain doubts that may fall in this work, treated by question, in destroying of
a man’s own curiosity, of cunning, and of natural wit, and in distinguishing of the degrees
and the parts of active living and contemplative
THE NINTH CHAPTER
That in the time of this work the remembrance of the holiest creature that ever God made letteth
more than it profiteth
THE TENTH CHAPTER

16

Table of the Chapters

How a man shall know when his thought is no sin; and if it be sin, when it is deadly and when it is
venial
THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER
That a man should weigh each thought and each stirring after that it is, and always eschew recklessness
in venial sin
THE TWELFTH CHAPTER
That by virtue of this work sin is not only destroyed, but also virtues begotten
THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER
What meekness is in itself, and when it is perfect and when it is imperfect
THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER
That without imperfect meekness coming before, it is impossible for a sinner to come to the perfect
virtue of meekness in this life
THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER
A short proof against their error that say that there is no perfecter cause to be meeked under, than
is the knowledge of a man’s own wretchedness
THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER
That by virtue of this work a sinner truly turned and called to contemplation cometh sooner to
perfection than by any other work; and by it soonest may get of God forgiveness of sins
THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER
That a very contemplative list not meddle him with active life, nor of anything that is done or spoken
about him, nor yet to answer to his blamers in excusing of himself
THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER
How that yet unto this day all actives complain of contemplatives as Martha did of Mary. Of the
which complaining ignorance is the cause
THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER
A short excusation of him that made this book, teaching how all contemplatives should have all
actives fully excused of their complaining words and deeds
THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER
17

Table of the Chapters

How Almighty God will goodly answer for all those that for the excusing of themselves list not leave
their business about the love of Him
THE ONE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
The true exposition of this gospel word, “Mary hath chosen the best part”
THE TWO AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
Of the wonderful love that Christ had to man in person of all sinners truly turned and called to the
grace of contemplation
THE THREE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
How God will answer and purvey for them in spirit, that for business about His love list not answer
nor purvey for themselves
THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
What charity is in itself, and how it is truly and perfectly contained in the work of this book.
THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
That in the time of this work a perfect soul hath no special beholding to any one man in this life
THE SIX AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
That without full special grace, or long use in common grace, the work of this book is right travailous;
and in this work, which is the work of the soul helped by grace, and which is the work of
only God
THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
Who should work in the gracious work of this book
THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
That a man should not presume to work in this work before the time that he be lawfully cleansed in
conscience of all his special deeds of sin
THE NINE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
That a man should bidingly travail in this work, and suffer the pain thereof, and judge no man
THE THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Who should blame and condemn other men’s defaults

18

Table of the Chapters

THE ONE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
How a man should have him in beginning of this work against all thoughts and stirrings of sin
THE TWO AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Of two ghostly devices that be helpful to a ghostly beginner in the work of this book
THE THREE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
That in this work a soul is cleansed both of his special sins and of the pain of them, and yet how
there is no perfect rest in this life
THE FOUR AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
That God giveth this grace freely without any means, and that it may not be come to with means
THE FIVE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Of three means in the which a contemplative prentice should be occupied; in reading, thinking, and
praying
THE SIX AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Of the meditations of them that continually travail in the work of this book
THE SEVEN AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Of the special prayers of them that be continual workers in the work of this book
THE EIGHT AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
How and why that short prayer pierceth heaven
THE NINE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
How a perfect worker shall pray, and what prayer is in itself; and, if a man shall pray in words, which
words accord them most to the property of prayer
THE FORTIETH CHAPTER
That in the time of this work a soul hath no special beholding to any vice in itself nor to any virtue
in itself
THE ONE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
That in all other works beneath this, men should keep discretion; but in this none
THE TWO AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
19

Table of the Chapters

That by indiscretion in this, men shall keep discretion in all other things; and surely else never
THE THREE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
That all writing and feeling of a man’s own being must needs be lost if the perfection of this work
shall verily be felt in any soul in this life
THE FOUR AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
How a soul shall dispose it on its own part, for to destroy all witting and feeling of its own being
THE FIVE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
A good declaring of some certain deceits that may befall in this work
THE SIX AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
A good teaching how a man shall flee these deceits, and work more with a listiness of spirit, than
with any boisterousness of body
THE SEVEN AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
A slight teaching of this work in purity of spirit; declaring how that on one manner a soul should
shew his desire unto God, and on ye contrary, unto man
THE EIGHT AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
How God will be served both with body and with soul, and reward men in both; and how men shall
know when all those sounds and sweetness that fall into the body in time of prayer be both
good and evil
THE NINE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
The substance of all perfection is nought else but a good will; and how that all sounds and comforts
and sweetness that may befall in this life be to it but as it were accidents
THE FIFTIETH CHAPTER
Which is chaste love; and how in some creatures such sensible comforts be but seldom, and in some
right oft
THE ONE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
That men should have great wariness so that they understand not bodily a thing that is meant ghostly;
and specially it is good to be wary in understanding of this word in, and of this word up
THE TWO AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
20

Table of the Chapters

How these young presumptuous disciples misunderstand this word in, and of the deceits that follow
thereon
THE THREE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
Of divers unseemly practices that follow them that lack the work of this book
THE FOUR AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
How that by virtue of this work a man is governed full wisely, and made full seemly as well in body
as in soul
THE FIVE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
How they be deceived that follow the fervour of spirit in condemning of some without discretion
THE SIX AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
How they be deceived that lean more to the curiosity of natural wit, and of clergy learned in the
school of men than to the common doctrine and counsel of Holy Church
THE SEVEN AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
How these young presumptuous disciples misunderstand this other word up; and of the deceits that
follow thereon
THE EIGHT AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
That a man shall not take ensample of Saint Martin and of Saint Stephen, for to strain his imagination
bodily upwards in the time of his prayer
THE NINE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
That a man shall not take ensample at the bodily ascension of Christ, for to strain his imagination
upwards bodily in the time of prayer: and that time, place, and body, these three should be
forgotten in all ghostly working
THE SIXTIETH CHAPTER
That the high and the next way to heaven is run by desires, and not by paces of feet
THE ONE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
That all bodily thing is subject unto ghostly thing, and is ruled thereafter by the course of nature,
and not contrariwise
THE TWO AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
21

Table of the Chapters

How a man may wit when his ghostly work is beneath him or without him and when it is even with
him or within him, and when it is above him and under his God
THE THREE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
Of the powers of a soul in general, and how Memory in special is a principal power comprehending
in it all the other powers and all those things in the which they work
THE FOUR AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
Of the other two principal powers, Reason and Will, and of the work of them before sin and after
THE FIVE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
Of the first secondary power, Imagination by name; and of the works and of the obedience of it unto
Reason, before sin and after
THE SIX AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
Of the other secondary power, Sensuality by name; and of the works and of the obedience of it unto
Will, before sin and after
THE SEVEN AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
That whoso knoweth not the powers of a soul and the manner of her working, may lightly be deceived
in understanding of ghostly words and of ghostly working; and how a soul is made a God
in grace
THE EIGHT AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
That nowhere bodily, is everywhere ghostly; and how our outer man calleth the work of this book
nought
THE NINE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
How that a man’s affection is marvelously changed in ghostly feeling of this nought, when it is
nowhere wrought
THE SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
That right as by the defailing of our bodily wits we begin more readily to come to knowing of ghostly
things, so by the defailing of our ghostly wits we begin most readily to come to the knowledge
of God, such as is possible by grace to be had here
THE ONE AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER

22

Table of the Chapters

That some may not come to feel the perfection of this work but in time of ravishing, and some may
have it when they will, in the common state of man’s soul
THE TWO AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
That a worker in this work should not deem nor think of another worker as he feeleth in himself
THE THREE AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
How that after the likeness of Moses, of Bezaleel and of Aaron meddling them about the Ark of the
Testament, we profit on three manners in this grace of contemplation, for this grace is
figured in that Ark
THE FOUR AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
How that the matter of this book is never more read or spoken, nor heard read or spoken, of a soul
disposed thereto without feeling of a very accordance to the effect of the same work: and of
rehearsing of the same charge that is written in the prologue
THE FIVE AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
Of some certain tokens by the which a man may prove whether he be called of God to work in this
work
AND HERE ENDETH THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS
GHOSTLY FRIEND IN GOD, I pray thee and I beseech thee that thou wilt have a busy beholding to the course and the manner of thy calling. And thank God heartily so that thou
mayest through help of His grace stand stiffly in the state, in the degree, and in the form of
living that thou hast entirely purposed against all the subtle assailing of thy bodily and
ghostly enemies, and win to the crown of life that evermore lasteth. Amen.

64

65

23

Chapter 1: Of four degrees of Christian men's living, and of the course…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIRST CHAPTER
Of four degrees of Christian men’s living; and of the course of his calling that this
book was made unto.
GHOSTLY friend in God, thou shalt well understand that I find, in my boisterous beholding,
four degrees and forms of Christian men’s living: and they be these, Common, Special,
Singular, and Perfect. Three of these may be begun and ended in this life; and the fourth
may by grace be begun here, but it shall ever last without end in the bliss of Heaven. And
right as thou seest how they be set here in order each one after other; first Common, then
Special, after Singular, and last Perfect, right so me thinketh that in the same order and in
the same course our Lord hath of His great mercy called thee and led thee unto Him by the
desire of thine heart. For first thou wottest well that when thou wert living in the common
degree of Christian men’s living in company of thy worldly friends, it seemeth to me that
the everlasting love of His Godhead, through the which He made thee and wrought thee
when thou wert nought, and sithen bought thee with the price of His precious blood when
thou wert lost in Adam, might not suffer thee to be so far from Him in form and degree of
living. And therefore He kindled thy desire full graciously, and fastened by it a leash of
longing, and led thee by it into a more special state and form of living, to be a servant among
the special servants of His; where thou mightest learn to live more specially and more ghostly
in His service than thou didst, or mightest do, in the common degree of living before. And
what more?
Yet it seemeth that He would not leave thee thus lightly, for love of His heart, the
which He hath evermore had unto thee since thou wert aught: but what did He? Seest thou
nought how Mistily and how graciously He hath privily pulled thee to the third degree and
manner of living, the which is called Singular? In the which solitary form and manner of
living, thou mayest learn to lift up the foot of thy love; and step towards that state and degree
of living that is perfect, and the last state of all.

24

Chapter 2: A short stirring to meekness, and to the work of this book

HERE BEGINNETH THE SECOND CHAPTER
A short stirring to meekness, and to the work of this book.
LOOK up now, weak wretch, and see what thou art. What art thou, and what hast thou
merited, thus to be called of our Lord? What weary wretched heart, and sleeping in sloth,
is that, the which is not wakened with the draught of this love and the voice of this calling!
Beware, thou wretch, in this while with thine enemy; and hold thee never the holier nor the
better, for the worthiness of this calling and for the singular form of living that thou art in.
But the more wretched and cursed, unless thou do that in thee is goodly, by grace and by
counsel, to live after thy calling. And insomuch thou shouldest be more meek and loving
to thy ghostly spouse, that He that is the Almighty God, King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
would meek Him so low unto thee, and amongst all the flock of His sheep so graciously
would choose thee to be one of His specials, and sithen set thee in the place of pasture, where
thou mayest be fed with the sweetness of His love, in earnest of thine heritage the Kingdom
of Heaven.
Do on then, I pray thee, fast. Look now forwards and let be backwards; and see what
thee faileth, and not what thou hast, for that is the readiest getting and keeping of meekness.
All thy life now behoveth altogether to stand in desire, if thou shalt profit in degree of perfection. This desire behoveth altogether be wrought in thy will, by the hand of Almighty
God and thy consent. But one thing I tell thee. He is a jealous lover and suffereth no fellowship, and Him list not work in thy will but if He be only with thee by Himself. He asketh
none help, but only thyself. He wills, thou do but look on Him and let Him alone. And keep
thou the windows and the door, for flies and enemies assailing. And if thou be willing to do
this, thee needeth but meekly press upon him with prayer, and soon will He help thee. Press
on then, let see how thou bearest thee. He is full ready, and doth but abideth thee. But what
shalt thou do, and how shalt thou press?

25

Chapter 3: How the work of this book shall be wrought and of the worthiness…

HERE BEGINNETH THE THIRD CHAPTER
How the work of this book shall be wrought, and of the worthiness of it before all
other works.
LIFT up thine heart unto God with a meek stirring of love; and mean Himself, and none of
His goods. And thereto, look the loath to think on aught but Himself. So that nought work
in thy wit, nor in thy will, but only Himself. And do that in thee is to forget all the creatures
that ever God made and the works of them; so that thy thought nor thy desire be not directed
nor stretched to any of them, neither in general nor in special, but let them be, and take no
heed to them. This is the work of the soul that most pleaseth God. All saints and angels have
joy of this work, and hasten them to help it in all their might. All fiends be furious when
thou thus dost, and try for to defeat it in all that they can. All men living in earth be wonderfully holpen of this work, thou wottest not how. Yea, the souls in purgatory be eased of their
pain by virtue of this work. Thyself art cleansed and made virtuous by no work so much.
And yet it is the lightest work of all, when a soul is helped with grace in sensible list, and
soonest done. But else it is hard, and wonderful to thee for to do.
Let not, therefore, but travail therein till thou feel list. For at the first time when
thou dost it, thou findest but a darkness; and as it were a cloud of unknowing, thou knowest
not what, saving that thou feelest in thy will a naked intent unto God. This darkness and
this cloud is, howsoever thou dost, betwixt thee and thy God, and letteth thee that thou
mayest neither see Him clearly by light of understanding in thy reason, nor feel Him in
sweetness of love in thine affection.
And therefore shape thee to bide in this darkness as long as thou mayest, evermore
crying after Him that thou lovest. For if ever thou shalt feel Him or see Him, as it may be
here, it behoveth always to be in this cloud in this darkness. And if thou wilt busily travail
as I bid thee, I trust in His mercy that thou shalt come thereto.

26

Chapter 4: Of the shortness of this work, and how it may not be come to…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FOURTH CHAPTER
Of the shortness of this word, and how it may not be come to by curiosity of wit,
nor by imagination.
BUT for this, that thou shalt not err in this working and ween that it be otherwise than it
is, I shall tell thee a little more thereof, as me thinketh.
This work asketh no long time or it be once truly done, as some men ween; for it is
the shortest work of all that man may imagine. It is never longer, nor shorter, than is an
atom: the which atom, by the definition of true philosophers in the science of astronomy,
is the least part of time. And it is so little that for the littleness of it, it is indivisible and nearly
incomprehensible. This is that time of the which it is written: All time that is given to thee,
it shall be asked of thee, how thou hast dispended it. And reasonable thing it is that thou
give account of it: for it is neither longer nor shorter, but even according to one only stirring
that is within the principal working might of thy soul, the which is thy will. For even so
many willings or desirings, and no more nor no fewer, may be and are in one hour in thy
will, as are atoms in one hour. And if thou wert reformed by grace to the first state of man’s
soul, as it was before sin, then thou shouldest evermore by help of that grace be lord of that
stirring or of those stirrings. So that none went forby, but all they should stretch into the
sovereign desirable, and into the highest willable thing: the which is God. For He is even
meet to our soul by measuring of His Godhead; and our soul even meet unto Him by worthiness of our creation to His image and to His likeness. And He by Himself without more,
and none but He, is sufficient to the full and much more to fulfil the will and the desire of
our soul. And our soul by virtue of this reforming grace is made sufficient to the full to
comprehend all Him by love, the which is incomprehensible to all created knowledgeable
powers, as is angel, or man’s soul; I mean, by their knowing, and not by their loving. And
therefore I call them in this case knowledgeable powers. But yet all reasonable creatures,
angel and man, have in them each one by himself, one principal working power, the which
is called a knowledgeable power, and another principal working power, the which is called
a loving power. Of the which two powers, to the first, the which is a knowledgeable power,
God that is the maker of them is evermore incomprehensible; and to the second, the which
is the loving power, in each one diversely He is all comprehensible to the full. Insomuch
that a loving soul alone in itself, by virtue of love should comprehend in itself Him that is
sufficient to the full—and much more, without comparison—to fill all the souls and angels
that ever may be. And this is the endless marvellous miracle of love; the working of which
shall never take end, for ever shall He do it, and never shall He cease for to do it. See who
by grace see may, for the feeling of this is endless bliss, and the contrary is endless pain.

27

Chapter 4: Of the shortness of this work, and how it may not be come to…

And therefore whoso were reformed by grace thus to continue in keeping of the
stirrings of his will, should never be in this life—as he may not be without these stirrings in
nature—without some taste of the endless sweetness, and in the bliss of heaven without the
full food. And therefore have no wonder though I stir thee to this work. For this is the work,
as thou shalt hear afterward, in the which man should have continued if he never had sinned:
and to the which working man was made, and all things for man, to help him and further
him thereto, and by the which working a man shall be repaired again. And for the defailing
of this working, a man falleth evermore deeper and deeper in sin, and further and further
from God. And by keeping and continual working in this work only without more, a man
evermore riseth higher and higher from sin, and nearer and nearer unto God.
And therefore take good heed unto time, how that thou dispendest it: for nothing
is more precious than time. In one little time, as little as it is, may heaven be won and lost.
A token it is that time is precious: for God, that is given of time, giveth never two times together, but each one after other. And this He doth, for He will not reverse the order or the
ordinal course in the cause of His creation. For time is made for man, and not man for time.
And therefore God, that is the ruler of nature, will not in His giving of time go before the
stirring of nature in man’s soul; the which is even according to one time only. So that man
shall have none excusation against God in the Doom, and at the giving of account of dispending of time, saying, “Thou givest two times at once, and I have but one stirring at once.”
But sorrowfully thou sayest now, “How shall I do? and sith this is thus that thou
sayest, how shall I give account of each time severally; I that have unto this day, now of four
and twenty years age, never took heed of time? If I would now amend it, thou wottest well,
by very reason of thy words written before, it may not be after the course of nature, nor of
common grace, that I should now heed or else make satisfaction, for any more times than
for those that be for to come. Yea, and moreover well I wot by very proof, that of those that
be to come I shall on no wise, for abundance of frailty and slowness of spirits, be able to
observe one of an hundred. So that I am verily concluded in these reasons. Help me now
for the love of JESUS!”
Right well hast thou said, for the love of JESUS. For in the love of JESUS; there shall
be thine help. Love is such a power, that it maketh all thing common. Love therefore JESUS;
and all thing that He hath, it is thine. He by His Godhead is maker and giver of time. He by
His manhood is the very keeper of time. And He by His Godhead and His manhood together,
is the truest Doomsman, and the asker of account of dispensing of time. Knit thee therefore
to Him, by love and by belief, and then by virtue of that knot thou shalt be common perceiver
with Him, and with all that by love so be knitted unto Him: that is to say, with our Lady
Saint Mary that full was of all grace in keeping of time, with all the angels of heaven that
never may lose time, and with all the saints in heaven and in earth, that by the grace of JESUS
heed time full justly in virtue of love. Lo! here lieth comfort; construe thou clearly, and pick
28

Chapter 4: Of the shortness of this work, and how it may not be come to…

thee some profit. But of one thing I warn thee amongst all other. I cannot see who may truly
challenge community thus with JESUS and His just Mother, His high angels and also with
His saints; but if he be such an one, that doth that in him is with helping of grace in keeping
of time. So that he be seen to be a profiter on his part, so little as is, unto the community;
as each one of them doth on his.
And therefore take heed to this work, and to the marvellous manner of it within in
thy soul. For if it be truly conceived, it is but a sudden stirring, and as it were unadvised,
speedily springing unto God as a sparkle from the coal. And it is marvellous to number the
stirrings that may be in one hour wrought in a soul that is disposed to this work. And yet
in one stirring of all these, he may have suddenly and perfectly forgotten all created thing.
But fast after each stirring, for corruption of the flesh, it falleth down again to some thought
or to some done or undone deed. But what thereof? For fast after, it riseth again as suddenly
as it did before.
And here may men shortly conceive the manner of this working, and clearly know
that it is far from any fantasy, or any false imagination or quaint opinion: the which be
brought in, not by such a devout and a meek blind stirring of love, but by a proud, curious,
and an imaginative wit. Such a proud, curious wit behoveth always be borne down and stiffly
trodden down under foot, if this work shall truly be conceived in purity of spirit. For whoso
heareth this work either be read or spoken of, and weeneth that it may, or should, be come
to by travail in their wits, and therefore they sit and seek in their wits how that it may be,
and in this curiosity they travail their imagination peradventure against the course of nature,
and they feign a manner of working the which is neither bodily nor ghostly—truly this man,
whatsoever he be, is perilously deceived. Insomuch, that unless God of His great goodness
shew His merciful miracle, and make him soon to leave work, and meek him to counsel of
proved workers, he shall fall either into frenzies, or else into other great mischiefs of ghostly
sins and devils’ deceits; through the which he may lightly be lost, both life and soul, without
any end. And therefore for God’s love be wary in this work, and travail not in thy wits nor
in thy imagination on nowise: for I tell thee truly, it may not be come to by travail in them,
and therefore leave them and work not with them.
And ween not, for I call it a darkness or a cloud, that it be any cloud congealed of
the humours that flee in the air, nor yet any darkness such as is in thine house on nights
when the candle is out. For such a darkness and such a cloud mayest thou imagine with
curiosity of wit, for to bear before thine eyes in the lightest day of summer: and also contrariwise in the darkest night of winter, thou mayest imagine a clear shining light. Let be such
falsehood. I mean not thus. For when I say darkness, I mean a lacking of knowing: as all
that thing that thou knowest not, or else that thou hast forgotten, it is dark to thee; for thou
seest it not with thy ghostly eye. And for this reason it is not called a cloud of the air, but a
cloud of unknowing, that is betwixt thee and thy God.
29

Chapter 5: That in the time of this work all the creatures that ever have…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIFTH CHAPTER
That in the time of this word all the creatures that ever have been, be now, or
ever shall be, and all the works of those same creatures, should be hid under the cloud
of forgetting.
AND if ever thou shalt come to this cloud and dwell and work therein as I bid thee, thou
behoveth as this cloud of unknowing is above thee, betwixt thee and thy God, right so put
a cloud of forgetting beneath thee; betwixt thee and all the creatures that ever be made. Thee
thinketh, peradventure, that thou art full far from God because that this cloud of unknowing
is betwixt thee and thy God: but surely, an it be well conceived, thou art well further from
Him when thou hast no cloud of forgetting betwixt thee and all the creatures that ever be
made. As oft as I say, all the creatures that ever be made, as oft I mean not only the creatures
themselves, but also all the works and the conditions of the same creatures. I take out not
one creature, whether they be bodily creatures or ghostly, nor yet any condition or work of
any creature, whether they be good or evil: but shortly to say, all should be hid under the
cloud of forgetting in this case.
For although it be full profitable sometime to think of certain conditions and deeds
of some certain special creatures, nevertheless yet in this work it profiteth little or nought.
For why? Memory or thinking of any creature that ever God made, or of any of their deeds
either, it is a manner of ghostly light: for the eye of thy soul is opened on it and even fixed
thereupon, as the eye of a shooter is upon the prick that he shooteth to. And one thing I tell
thee, that all thing that thou thinketh upon, it is above thee for the time, and betwixt thee
and thy God: and insomuch thou art the further from God, that aught is in thy mind but
only God.
Yea! and, if it be courteous and seemly to say, in this work it profiteth little or nought
to think of the kindness or the worthiness of God, nor on our Lady, nor on the saints or
angels in heaven, nor yet on the joys in heaven: that is to say, with a special beholding to
them, as thou wouldest by that beholding feed and increase thy purpose. I trow that on nowise
it should help in this case and in this work. For although it be good to think upon the
kindness of God, and to love Him and praise Him for it, yet it is far better to think upon the
naked being of Him, and to love Him and praise Him for Himself.

30

Chapter 6: A short conceit of the work of this book, treated by questio

HERE BEGINNETH THE SIXTH CHAPTER
A short conceit of the work of this book, treated by question.
BUT now thou askest me and sayest, “How shall I think on Himself, and what is He?” and
to this I cannot answer thee but thus: “I wot not.”
For thou hast brought me with thy question into that same darkness, and into that
same cloud of unknowing, that I would thou wert in thyself. For of all other creatures and
their works, yea, and of the works of God’s self, may a man through grace have fullhead of
knowing, and well he can think of them: but of God Himself can no man think. And therefore
I would leave all that thing that I can think, and choose to my love that thing that I cannot
think. For why; He may well be loved, but not thought. By love may He be gotten and
holden; but by thought never. And therefore, although it be good sometime to think of the
kindness and the worthiness of God in special, and although it be a light and a part of contemplation: nevertheless yet in this work it shall be cast down and covered with a cloud of
forgetting. And thou shalt step above it stalwartly, but Mistily, with a devout and a pleasing
stirring of love, and try for to pierce that darkness above thee. And smite upon that thick
cloud of unknowing with a sharp dart of longing love; and go not thence for thing that befalleth.

31

Chapter 7: How a man shall have him in this work against all thoughts, and…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVENTH CHAPTER
How a man shall have him in this work against all thoughts, and specially against
all those that arise of his own curiosity, of cunning, and of natural wit.
AND if any thought rise and will press continually above thee betwixt thee and that darkness,
and ask thee saying, “What seekest thou, and what wouldest thou have?” say thou, that it is
God that thou wouldest have. “Him I covet, Him I seek, and nought but Him.”
And if he ask thee, “What is that God?” say thou, that it is God that made thee and
bought thee, and that graciously hath called thee to thy degree. “And in Him,” say, “thou
hast no skill.” And therefore say, “Go thou down again,” and tread him fast down with a
stirring of love, although he seem to thee right holy, and seem to thee as he would help thee
to seek Him. For peradventure he will bring to thy mind diverse full fair and wonderful
points of His kindness, and say that He is full sweet, and full loving, full gracious, and full
merciful. And if thou wilt hear him, he coveteth no better; for at the last he will thus jangle
ever more and more till he bring thee lower, to the mind of His Passion.
And there will he let thee see the wonderful kindness of God, and if thou hear him,
he careth for nought better. For soon after he will let thee see thine old wretched living, and
peradventure in seeing and thinking thereof he will bring to thy mind some place that thou
hast dwelt in before this time. So that at the last, or ever thou wit, thou shalt be scattered
thou wottest not where. The cause of this scattering is, that thou heardest him first wilfully,
then answeredest him, receivedest him, and lettest him alone.
And yet, nevertheless, the thing that he said was both good and holy. Yea, and so
holy, that what man or woman that weeneth to come to contemplation without many such
sweet meditations of their own wretchedness, the passion, the kindness, and the great
goodness, and the worthiness of God coming before, surely he shall err and fail of his purpose.
And yet, nevertheless, it behoveth a man or a woman that hath long time been used in these
meditations, nevertheless to leave them, and put them and hold them far down under the
cloud of forgetting, if ever he shall pierce the cloud of unknowing betwixt him and his God.
Therefore what time that thou purposest thee to this work, and feelest by grace that thou
art called of God, lift then up thine heart unto God with a meek stirring of love; and mean
God that made thee, and bought thee, and that graciously hath called thee to thy degree,
and receive none other thought of God. And yet not all these, but if thou list; for it sufficeth
enough, a naked intent direct unto God without any other cause than Himself.
And if thee list have this intent lapped and folden in one word, for thou shouldest
have better hold thereupon, take thee but a little word of one syllable: for so it is better than

32

Chapter 7: How a man shall have him in this work against all thoughts, and…

of two, for ever the shorter it is the better it accordeth with the work of the Spirit. And such
a word is this word GOD or this word LOVE. Choose thee whether thou wilt, or another;
as thee list, which that thee liketh best of one syllable. And fasten this word to thine heart,
so that it never go thence for thing that befalleth.
This word shall be thy shield and thy spear, whether thou ridest on peace or on war.
With this word, thou shalt beat on this cloud and this darkness above thee. With this word,
thou shall smite down all manner of thought under the cloud of forgetting. Insomuch, that
if any thought press upon thee to ask thee what thou wouldest have, answer them with no
more words but with this one word. And if he proffer thee of his great clergy to expound
thee that word and to tell thee the conditions of that word, say him: That thou wilt have it
all whole, and not broken nor undone. And if thou wilt hold thee fast on this purpose, be
thou sure, he will no while abide. And why? For that thou wilt not let him feed him on such
sweet meditations of God touched before.

33

Chapter 8: That in the time of his work all the creatures that ever have…

HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHTH CHAPTER
A good declaring of certain doubts that may fall in this word treated by question,
in destroying of a man’s own curiosity, of cunning, and of natural wit, and in distinguishing of the degrees and the parts of active living and contemplative.
BUT now thou askest me, “What is he, this that thus presseth upon me in this work; and
whether it is a good thing or an evil? And if it be an evil thing, then have I marvel,” thou
sayest, “why that he will increase a man’s devotion so much. For sometimes me think that
it is a passing comfort to listen after his tales. For he will sometime, me think, make me
weep full heartily for pity of the Passion of Christ, sometime for my wretchedness, and for
many other reasons, that me thinketh be full holy, and that done me much good. And
therefore me thinketh that he should on nowise be evil; and if he be good, and with his sweet
tales doth me so much good withal, then I have great marvel why that thou biddest me put
him down and away so far under the cloud of forgetting?”
Now surely me thinketh that this is a well moved question, and therefore I think to
answer thereto so feebly as I can. First when thou askest me what is he, this that presseth so
fast upon thee in this work, proffering to help thee in this work; I say that it is a sharp and
a clear beholding of thy natural wit, printed in thy reason within in thy soul. And where
thou askest me thereof whether it be good or evil, I say that it behoveth always be good in
its nature. For why, it is a beam of the likeness of God. But the use thereof may be both good
and evil. Good, when it is opened by grace for to see thy wretchedness, the passion, the
kindness, and the wonderful works of God in His creatures bodily and ghostly. And then it
is no wonder though it increase thy devotion full much, as thou sayest. But then is the use
evil, when it is swollen with pride and with curiosity of much clergy and letterly cunning as
in clerks; and maketh them press for to be holden not meek scholars and masters of divinity
or of devotion, but proud scholars of the devil and masters of vanity and of falsehood. And
in other men or women whatso they be, religious or seculars, the use and the working of
this natural wit is then evil, when it is swollen with proud and curious skills of worldly things,
and fleshly conceits in coveting of worldly worships and having of riches and vain plesaunce
and flatterings of others.
And where that thou askest me, why that thou shalt put it down under the cloud
of forgetting, since it is so, that it is good in its nature, and thereto when it is well used it
doth thee so much good and increaseth thy devotion so much. To this I answer and say—That
thou shalt well understand that there be two manner of lives in Holy Church. The one is
active life, and the other is contemplative life. Active is the lower, and contemplative is the

34

Chapter 8: That in the time of his work all the creatures that ever have…

higher. Active life hath two degrees, a higher and a lower: and also contemplative life hath
two degrees, a lower and a higher. Also, these two lives be so coupled together that although
they be divers in some part, yet neither of them may be had fully without some part of the
other. For why? That part that is the higher part of active life, that same part is the lower
part of contemplative life. So that a man may not be fully active, but if he be in part contemplative; nor yet fully contemplative, as it may be here, but if he be in part active. The condition
of active life is such, that it is both begun and ended in this life; but not so of contemplative
life. For it is begun in this life, and shall last without end. For why? That part that Mary
chose shall never be taken away. Active life is troubled and travailed about many things; but
contemplative sitteth in peace with one thing.
The lower part of active life standeth in good and honest bodily works of mercy
and of charity. The higher part of active life and the lower part of contemplative life lieth in
goodly ghostly meditations, and busy beholding unto a man’s own wretchedness with sorrow
and contrition, unto the Passion of Christ and of His servants with pity and compassion,
and unto the wonderful gifts, kindness, and works of God in all His creatures bodily and
ghostly with thanking and praising. But the higher part of contemplation, as it may be had
here, hangeth all wholly in this darkness and in this cloud of unknowing; with a loving
stirring and a blind beholding unto the naked being of God Himself only.
In the lower part of active life a man is without himself and beneath himself. In the
higher part of active life and the lower part of contemplative life, a man is within himself
and even with himself. But in the higher part of contemplative life, a man is above himself
and under his God. Above himself he is: for why, he purposeth him to win thither by grace,
whither he may not come by nature. That is to say, to be knit to God in spirit, and in onehead
of love and accordance of will. And right as it is impossible, to man’s understanding, for a
man to come to the higher part of active life, but if he cease for a time of the lower part; so
it is that a man shall not come to the higher part of contemplative life, but if he cease for a
time of the lower part. And as unlawful a thing as it is, and as much as it would let a man
that sat in his meditations, to have regard then to his outward bodily works, the which he
had done, or else should do, although they were never so holy works in themselves: surely
as unlikely a thing it is, and as much would it let a man that should work in this darkness
and in this cloud of unknowing with an affectuous stirring of love to God for Himself, for
to let any thought or any meditation of God’s wonderful gifts, kindness, and works in any
of His creatures bodily or ghostly, rise upon him to press betwixt him and his God; although
they be never so holy thoughts, nor so profound, nor so comfortable.
And for this reason it is that I bid thee put down such a sharp subtle thought, and
cover him with a thick cloud of forgetting, be he never so holy nor promise he thee never
so well for to help thee in thy purpose. For why, love may reach to God in this life, but not
knowing. And all the whiles that the soul dwelleth in this deadly body, evermore is the
35

Chapter 8: That in the time of his work all the creatures that ever have…

sharpness of our understanding in beholding of all ghostly things, but most specially of God,
mingled with some manner of fantasy; for the which our work should be unclean. And unless
more wonder were, it should lead us into much error.

36

Chapter 9: That in the time of this work the rememberance of the holiest…

HERE BEGINNETH THE NINTH CHAPTER
That in the time of this work the remembrance of the holiest Creature that ever
God made letteth more than it profiteth.
AND therefore the sharp stirring of thine understanding, that will always press upon thee
when thou settest thee to this work, behoveth always be borne down; and but thou bear him
down, he will bear thee down. Insomuch, that when thou weenest best to abide in this
darkness, and that nought is in thy mind but only God; an thou look truly thou shalt find
thy mind not occupied in this darkness, but in a clear beholding of some thing beneath God.
And if it thus be, surely then is that thing above thee for the time, and betwixt thee and thy
God. And therefore purpose thee to put down such clear beholdings, be they never so holy
nor so likely. For one thing I tell thee, it is more profitable to the health of thy soul, more
worthy in itself, and more pleasing to God and to all the saints and angels in heaven—yea,
and more helpful to all thy friends, bodily and ghostly, quick and dead—such a blind stirring
of love unto God for Himself, and such a privy pressing upon this cloud of unknowing, and
better thee were for to have it and for to feel it in thine affection ghostly, than it is for to
have the eyes of thy soul opened in contemplation or beholding of all the angels or saints
in heaven, or in hearing of all the mirth and the melody that is amongst them in bliss.
And look thou have no wonder of this: for mightest thou once see it as clearly, as
thou mayest by grace come to for to grope it and feel it in this life, thou wouldest think as
I say. But be thou sure that clear sight shall never man have here in this life: but the feeling
may men have through grace when God vouchsafeth. And therefore lift up thy love to that
cloud: rather, if I shall say thee sooth, let God draw thy love up to that cloud and strive thou
through help of His grace to forget all other thing.
For since a naked remembrance of any thing under God pressing against thy will
and thy witting putteth thee farther from God than thou shouldest be if it were not, and
letteth thee, and maketh thee inasmuch more unable to feel in experience the fruit of His
love, what trowest thou then that a remembrance wittingly and wilfully drawn upon thee
will hinder thee in thy purpose? And since a remembrance of any special saint or of any
clean ghostly thing will hinder thee so much, what trowest thou then that the remembrance
of any man living in this wretched life, or of any manner of bodily or worldly thing, will
hinder thee and let thee in this work?
I say not that such a naked sudden thought of any good and clean ghostly thing
under God pressing against thy will or thy witting, or else wilfully drawn upon thee with
advisement in increasing of thy devotion, although it be letting to this manner of work—that

37

Chapter 9: That in the time of this work the rememberance of the holiest…

it is therefore evil. Nay! God forbid that thou take it so. But I say, although it be good and
holy, yet in this work it letteth more than it profiteth. I mean for the time. For why? Surely
he that seeketh God perfectly, he will not rest him finally in the remembrance of any angel
or saint that is in heaven.

38

Chapter 10: How a man shall know when his thought is no sin; and if it be…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TENTH CHAPTER
How a man shall know when his thought is no sin; and if it be sin, when it is
deadly and when it is venial.
BUT it is not thus of the remembrance of any man or woman living in this life, or of any
bodily or worldly thing whatsoever that it be. For why, a naked sudden thought of any of
them, pressing against thy will and thy witting, although it be no sin imputed unto thee—for
it is the pain of the original sin pressing against thy power, of the which sin thou art cleansed
in thy baptism—nevertheless yet if this sudden stirring or thought be not smitten soon
down, as fast for frailty thy fleshly heart is strained thereby: with some manner of liking, if
it be a thing that pleaseth thee or hath pleased thee before, or else with some manner of
grumbling, if it be a thing that thee think grieveth thee, or hath grieved thee before. The
which fastening, although it may in fleshly living men and women that be in deadly sin before
be deadly; nevertheless in thee and in all other that have in a true will forsaken the world,
and are obliged unto any degree in devout living in Holy Church, what so it be, privy or
open, and thereto that will be ruled not after their own will and their own wit, but after the
will and the counsel of their sovereigns, what so they be, religious or seculars, such a liking
or a grumbling fastened in the fleshly heart is but venial sin. The cause of this is the
grounding and the rooting of your intent in God, made in the beginning of your living in
that state that ye stand in, by the witness and the counsel of some discreet father.
But if it so be, that this liking or grumbling fastened in thy fleshly heart be suffered
so long to abide unreproved, that then at the last it is fastened to the ghostly heart, that is
to say the will, with a full consent: then, it is deadly sin. And this befalleth when thou or any
of them that I speak of wilfully draw upon thee the remembrance of any man or woman
living in this life, or of any bodily or worldly thing other: insomuch, that if it be a thing the
which grieveth or hath grieved thee before, there riseth in thee an angry passion and an
appetite of vengeance, the which is called Wrath. Or else a fell disdain and a manner of
loathsomeness of their person, with despiteful and condemning thoughts, the which is called
Envy. Or else a weariness and an unlistiness of any good occupation bodily or ghostly, the
which is called Sloth.
And if it be a thing that pleaseth thee, or hath pleased thee before, there riseth in
thee a passing delight for to think on that thing what so it be. Insomuch, that thou restest
thee in that thought, and finally fastenest thine heart and thy will thereto, and feedest thy
fleshly heart therewith: so that thee think for the time that thou covetest none other wealth,
but to live ever in such a peace and rest with that thing that thou thinkest upon. If this

39

Chapter 10: How a man shall know when his thought is no sin; and if it be…

thought that thou thus drawest upon thee, or else receivest when it is put unto thee, and
that thou restest thee thus in with delight, be worthiness of nature or of knowing, of grace
or of degree, of favour or of fairhead, then it is Pride. And if it be any manner of worldly
good, riches or chattels, or what that man may have or be lord of, then it is Covetyse. If it
be dainty meats and drinks, or any manner of delights that man may taste, then it is Gluttony.
And if it be love or plesaunce, or any manner of fleshly dalliance, glosing or flattering of
any man or woman living in this life, or of thyself either: then it is Lechery.

40

Chapter 11: That a man should weigh each thought and each stirring after…

HERE BEGINNETH THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER
That a man should weigh each thought and each stirring after that it is, and always
eschew recklessness in venial sin.
I SAY not this for that I trow that thou, or any other such as I speak of, be guilty and
cumbered with any such sins; but for that I would that thou weighest each thought and each
stirring after that it is, and for I would that thou travailedst busily to destroy the first stirring
and thought of these things that thou mayest thus sin in. For one thing I tell thee; that who
weigheth not, or setteth little by, the first thought—yea, although it be no sin unto him—that
he, whosoever that he be, shall not eschew recklessness in venial sin. Venial sin shall no man
utterly eschew in this deadly life. But recklessness in venial sin should always be eschewed
of all the true disciples of perfection; and else I have no wonder though they soon sin deadly.

41

Chapter 12: That by Virtue of this word sin is not only destroyed, but also…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TWELFTH CHAPTER
That by Virtue of this word sin is not only destroyed, but also Virtues begotten.
AND, therefore, if thou wilt stand and not fall, cease never in thine intent: but beat evermore
on this cloud of unknowing that is betwixt thee and thy God with a sharp dart of longing
love, and loathe for to think on aught under God, and go not thence for anything that befalleth. For this is only by itself that work that destroyeth the ground and the root of sin.
Fast thou never so much, wake thou never so long, rise thou never so early, lie thou never
so hard, wear thou never so sharp; yea, and if it were lawful to do—as it is not—put thou
out thine eyes, cut thou out thy tongue of thy mouth, stop thou thine ears and thy nose
never so fast, though thou shear away thy members, and do all the pain to thy body that
thou mayest or canst think: all this would help thee right nought. Yet will stirring and rising
of sin be in thee.
Yea, and what more? Weep thou never so much for sorrow of thy sins, or of the
Passion of Christ, or have thou never so much mind of the joys of heaven, what may it do
to thee? Surely much good, much help, much profit, and much grace will it get thee. But in
comparison of this blind stirring of love, it is but a little that it doth, or may do, without
this. This by itself is the best part of Mary without these other. They without it profit but
little or nought. It destroyeth not only the ground and the root of sin as it may be here, but
thereto it getteth virtues. For an it be truly conceived, all virtues shall truly be, and perfectly
conceived, and feelingly comprehended, in it, without any mingling of the intent. And have
a man never so many virtues without it, all they be mingled with some crooked intent, for
the which they be imperfect.
For virtue is nought else but an ordained and a measured affection, plainly directed
unto God for Himself. For why? He in Himself is the pure cause of all virtues: insomuch,
that if any man be stirred to any one virtue by any other cause mingled with Him, yea, although that He be the chief, yet that virtue is then imperfect. As thus by example may be
seen in one virtue or two instead of all the other; and well may these two virtues be meekness
and charity. For whoso might get these two clearly, him needeth no more: for why, he hath
all.

42

Chapter 13: What meekness is in itself, and when it is perfect and when…

HERE BEGINNETH THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER
What meekness is in itself, and when it is perfect and when it is imperfect.
NOW let see first of the virtue of meekness; how that it is imperfect when it is caused of any
other thing mingled with God although He be the chief; and how that it is perfect when it
is caused of God by Himself. And first it is to wit, what meekness is in itself, if this matter
shall clearly be seen and conceived; and thereafter may it more verily be conceived in truth
of spirit what is the cause thereof.
Meekness in itself is nought else, but a true knowing and feeling of a man’s self as
he is. For surely whoso might verily see and feel himself as he is, he should verily be meek.
Two things there be, the which be cause of this meekness; the which be these. One is the
filth, the wretchedness, and the frailty of man, into the which he is fallen by sin; and the
which always him behoveth to feel in some part the whiles he liveth in this life, be he never
so holy. Another is the over-abundant love and the worthiness of God in Himself; in beholding of the which all nature quaketh, all clerks be fools, and all saints and angels be blind.
Insomuch, that were it not that through the wisdom of His Godhead He measured their
beholding after their ableness in nature and in grace, I defail to say what should befall them.
This second cause is perfect; for why, it shall last without end. And the tother before
is imperfect; for why, it shall not only fail at the end of this life, but full oft it may befall that
a soul in this deadly body for abundance of grace in multiplying of his desire—as oft and
as long as God vouchsafeth for to work it—shall have suddenly and perfectly lost and forgotten all witting and feeling of his being, not looking after whether he have been holy or
wretched. But whether this fall oft or seldom to a soul that is thus disposed, I trow that it
lasteth but a full short while: and in this time it is perfectly meeked, for it knoweth and feeleth
no cause but the Chief. And ever when it knoweth and feeleth the tother cause, communing
therewith, although this be the chief: yet it is imperfect meekness. Nevertheless yet it is good
and notwithstanding must be had; and God forbid that thou take it in any other manner
than I say.

43

Chapter 14: That without imperfect meekness coming before, it is impossible…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER
That without imperfect meekness coming before, it is impossible for a sinner to
come to the perfect Virtue of meekness in this life.
FOR although I call it imperfect meekness, yet I had liefer have a true knowing and a feeling
of myself as I am, and sooner I trow that it should get me the perfect cause and virtue of
meekness by itself, than it should an all the saints and angels in heaven, and all the men and
women of Holy Church living in earth, religious or seculars in all degrees, were set at once
all together to do nought else but to pray to God for me to get me perfect meekness. Yea,
and yet it is impossible a sinner to get, or to keep when it is gotten, the perfect virtue of
meekness without it.
And therefore swink and sweat in all that thou canst and mayest, for to get thee a
true knowing and a feeling of thyself as thou art; and then I trow that soon after that thou
shalt have a true knowing and a feeling of God as He is. Not as He is in Himself, for that
may no man do but Himself; nor yet as thou shalt do in bliss both body and soul together.
But as it is possible, and as He vouchsafeth to be known and felt of a meek soul living in this
deadly body.
And think not because I set two causes of meekness, one perfect and another imperfect, that I will therefore that thou leavest the travail about imperfect meekness, and set thee
wholly to get thee perfect. Nay, surely; I trow thou shouldest never bring it so about. But
herefore I do that I do: because I think to tell thee and let thee see the worthiness of this
ghostly exercise before all other exercise bodily or ghostly that man can or may do by grace.
How that a privy love pressed in cleanness of spirit upon this dark cloud of unknowing
betwixt thee and thy God, truly and perfectly containeth in it the perfect virtue of meekness
without any special or clear beholding of any thing under God. And because I would that
thou knewest which were perfect meekness, and settest it as a token before the love of thine
heart, and didst it for thee and for me. And because I would by this knowing make thee
more meek.
For ofttimes it befalleth that lacking of knowing is cause of much pride as me
thinketh. For peradventure an thou knewest not which were perfect meekness, thou
shouldest ween when thou hadst a little knowing and a feeling of this that I call imperfect
meekness, that thou hadst almost gotten perfect meekness: and so shouldest thou deceive
thyself, and ween that thou wert full meek when thou wert all belapped in foul stinking
pride. And therefore try for to travail about perfect meekness; for the condition of it is such,
that whoso hath it, and the whiles he hath it, he shall not sin, nor yet much after.

44

Chapter 15: A short proof against their error that say, that there is no…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER
A short proof against their error that say, that there is no perfecter cause to be
meeked under, than is the knowledge of a man’s own wretchedness.
AND trust steadfastly that there is such a perfect meekness as I speak of, and that it may be
come to through grace in this life. And this I say in confusion of their error, that say that
there is no perfecter cause of meekness than is that which is raised of the remembrance of
our wretchedness and our before-done sins.
I grant well, that to them that have been in accustomed sins, as I am myself and
have been, it is the most needful and speedful cause, to be meeked under the remembrance
of our wretchedness and our before-done sins, ever till the time be that the great rust of sin
be in great part rubbed away, our conscience and our counsel to witness. But to other that
be, as it were, innocents, the which never sinned deadly with an abiding will and avisement,
but through frailty and unknowing, and the which set them to be contemplatives—and to
us both if our counsel and our conscience witness our lawful amendment in contrition and
in confession, and in making satisfaction after the statute and the ordinance of all-Holy
Church, and thereto if we feel us stirred and called by grace to be contemplatives also—there
is then another cause to be meeked under as far above this cause as is the living of our Lady
Saint Mary above the living of the sinfullest penitent in Holy Church; or the living of Christ
above the living of any other man in this life; or else the living of an angel in heaven, the
which never felt—nor shall feel—frailty, is above the life of the frailest man that is here in
this world.
For if it so were that there were no perfect cause to be meeked under, but in seeing
and feeling of wretchedness, then would I wit of them that say so, what cause they be meeked
under that never see nor feel—nor never shall be in them—wretchedness nor stirring of sin:
as it is of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, our Lady Saint Mary, and all the saints and angels in
heaven. To this perfection, and all other, our Lord JESUS CHRIST calleth us Himself in the
gospel: where He biddeth that we should be perfect by grace as He Himself is by nature.

45

Chapter 16: That by virtue of this work a sinner truly turned and called…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER
That by Virtue of this work a sinner truly turned and called to contemplation
cometh sooner to perfection than by any other work; and by it soonest may get of God
forgiveness of sins.
LOOK that no man think it presumption, that he that is the wretchedest sinner of this life
dare take upon him after the time be that he have lawfully amended him, and after that he
have felt him stirred to that life that is called contemplative, by the assent of his counsel and
his conscience for to profer a meek stirring of love to his God, privily pressing upon the
cloud of unknowing betwixt him and his God. When our Lord said to Mary, in person of
all sinners that be called to contemplative life, “Thy sins be forgiven thee,” it was not for her
great sorrow, nor for the remembering of her sins, nor yet for her meekness that she had in
the beholding of her wretchedness only. But why then? Surely because she loved much.
Lo! here may men see what a privy pressing of love may purchase of our Lord, before
all other works that man may think. And yet I grant well, that she had full much sorrow,
and wept full sore for her sins, and full much she was meeked in remembrance of her
wretchedness. And so should we do, that have been wretches and accustomed sinners; all
our lifetime make hideous and wonderful sorrow for our sins, and full much be meeked in
remembrance of our wretchedness.
But how? Surely as Mary did. She, although she might not feel the deep hearty sorrow
of her sins—for why, all her lifetime she had them with her whereso she went, as it were in
a burthen bounden together and laid up full privily in the hole of her heart, in manner
never to be forgotten—nevertheless yet, it may be said and affirmed by Scripture, that she
had a more hearty sorrow, a more doleful desire, and a more deep sighing, and more she
languished, yea! almost to the death, for lacking of love, although she had full much love
(and have no wonder thereof, for it is the condition of a true lover that ever the more he
loveth, the more he longeth for to love), than she had for any remembrance of her sins.
And yet she wist well, and felt well in herself in a sad soothfastness, that she was a
wretch most foul of all other, and that her sins had made a division betwixt her and her God
that she loved so much: and also that they were in great part cause of her languishing sickness
for lacking of love. But what thereof? Came she therefore down from the height of desire
into the deepness of her sinful life, and searched in the foul stinking fen and dunghill of her
sins; searching them up, by one and by one, with all the circumstances of them, and sorrowed
and wept so upon them each one by itself? Nay, surely she did not so. And why? Because
God let her wit by His grace within in her soul, that she should never so bring it about. For

46

Chapter 16: That by virtue of this work a sinner truly turned and called…

so might she sooner have raised in herself an ableness to have oft sinned, than to have purchased by that work any plain forgiveness of all her sins.
And therefore she hung up her love and her longing desire in this cloud of unknowing, and learned her to love a thing the which she might not see clearly in this life, by light
of understanding in her reason, nor yet verily feel in sweetness of love in her affection. Insomuch, that she had ofttimes little special remembrance, whether that ever she had been
a sinner or none. Yea, and full ofttimes I hope that she was so deeply disposed to the love
of His Godhead that she had but right little special beholding unto the beauty of His precious
and His blessed body, in the which He sat full lovely speaking and preaching before her;
nor yet to anything else, bodily or ghostly. That this be sooth, it seemeth by the gospel.

47

Chapter 17: That a very contemplative list not meddle him with active life,…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER
That a Very contemplative list not meddle him with active life, nor of anything
that is done or spoken about him, nor yet to answer to his blamers in excusing of
himself.
IN the gospel of Saint Luke it is written, that when our Lord was in the house of Martha her
sister, all the time that Martha made her busy about the dighting of His meat, Mary her
sister sat at His feet. And in hearing of His word she beheld not to the business of her sister,
although her business was full good and full holy, for truly it is the first part of active life;
nor yet to the preciousness of His blessed body, nor to the sweet voice and the words of His
manhood, although it is better and holier, for it is the second part of active life and the first
of contemplative life.
But to the sovereignest wisdom of His Godhead lapped in the dark words of His
manhood, thither beheld she with all the love of her heart. For from thence she would not
remove, for nothing that she saw nor heard spoken nor done about her; but sat full still in
her body, with many a sweet privy and a listy love pressed upon that high cloud of unknowing
betwixt her and her God. For one thing I tell thee, that there was never yet pure creature in
this life, nor never yet shall be, so high ravished in contemplation and love of the Godhead,
that there is not evermore a high and a wonderful cloud of unknowing betwixt him and his
God. In this cloud it was that Mary was occupied with many a privy love pressed. And why?
Because it was the best and the holiest part of contemplation that may be in this life, and
from this part her list not remove for nothing. Insomuch, that when her sister Martha
complained to our Lord of her, and bade Him bid her sister rise and help her and let her
not so work and travail by herself, she sat full still and answered not with one word, nor
shewed not as much as a grumbling gesture against her sister for any plaint that she could
make. And no wonder: for why, she had another work to do that Martha wist not of. And
therefore she had no leisure to listen to her, nor to answer her at her plaint.
Lo! friend, all these works, these words, and these gestures, that were shewed betwixt
our Lord and these two sisters, be set in ensample of all actives and all contemplatives that
have been since in Holy Church, and shall be to the day of doom. For by Mary is understood
all contemplatives; for they should conform their living after hers. And by Martha, actives
on the same manner; and for the same reason in likeness.

48

Chapter 18: How that yet unto this day all actives complain of contemplatives…

HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER
How that yet unto this day all actives complain of contemplatives as Martha did
of Mary. Of the which complaining ignorance is the cause.
AND right as Martha complained then on Mary her sister, right so yet unto this day all
actives complain of contemplatives. For an there be a man or a woman in any company of
this world, what company soever it be, religious or seculars—I out-take none—the which
man or woman, whichever that it be, feeleth him stirred through grace and by counsel to
forsake all outward business, and for to set him fully for to live contemplative life after their
cunning and their conscience, their counsel according; as fast, their own brethren and their
sisters, and all their next friends, with many other that know not their stirrings nor that
manner of living that they set them to, with a great complaining spirit shall rise upon them,
and say sharply unto them that it is nought that they do. And as fast they will reckon up
many false tales, and many true also, of falling of men and women that have given them to
such life before: and never a good tale of them that stood.
I grant that many fall and have fallen of them that have in likeness forsaken the
world. And where they should have become God’s servants and His contemplatives, because
that they would not rule them by true ghostly counsel they have become the devil’s servants
and his contemplatives; and turned either to hypocrites or to heretics, or fallen into frenzies
and many other mischiefs, in slander of Holy Church. Of the which I leave to speak at this
time, for troubling of our matter. But nevertheless here after when God vouchsafeth and if
need be, men may see some of the conditions and the cause of their failings. And therefore
no more of them at this time; but forth of our matter.

49

Chapter 19: A short excusation of him that made this book, teaching how…

HERE BEGINNETH THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER
A short excusation of him that made this book teaching how all contemplatives
should have all actives fully excused of their complaining words and deeds.
SOME might think that I do little worship to Martha, that special saint, for I liken her words
of complaining of her sister unto these worldly men’s words, or theirs unto hers: and truly
I mean no unworship to her nor to them. And God forbid that I should in this work say
anything that might be taken in condemnation of any of the servants of God in any degree,
and namely of His special saint. For me thinketh that she should be full well had excused
of her plaint, taking regard to the time and the manner that she said it in. For that that she
said, her unknowing was the cause. And no wonder though she knew not at that time how
Mary was occupied; for I trow that before she had little heard of such perfection. And also
that she said, it was but courteously and in few words: and therefore she should always be
had excused.
And so me thinketh that these worldly living men and women of active life should
also full well be had excused of their complaining words touched before, although they say
rudely that they say; having beholding to their ignorance. For why? Right as Martha wist
full little what Mary her sister did when she complained of her to our Lord; right so on the
same manner these folk nowadays wot full little, or else nought, what these young disciples
of God mean, when they set them from the business of this world, and draw them to be
God’s special servants in holiness and rightfulness of spirit. And if they wist truly, I daresay
that they would neither do nor say as they say. And therefore me thinketh always that they
should be had excused: for why, they know no better living than is that they live in themselves.
And also when I think on mine innumerable defaults, the which I have made myself before
this time in words and deeds for default of knowing, me thinketh then if I would be had
excused of God for mine ignorant defaults, that I should charitably and piteously have other
men’s ignorant words and deeds always excused. And surely else, do I not to others as I
would they did to me.

50

Chapter 20: How Almighty God will goodly answer for all those that for the…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER
How Almighty God will goodly answer for all those that for the excusing of
themselves list not leave their business about the love of Him.
AND therefore me thinketh, that they that set them to be contemplatives should not only
have active men excused of their complaining words, but also me thinketh that they should
be so occupied in spirit that they should take little heed or none what men did or said about
them. Thus did Mary, our example of all, when Martha her sister complained to our Lord:
and if we will truly do thus our Lord will do now for us as He did then for Mary.
And how was that? Surely thus. Our lovely Lord Jesus Christ, unto whom no privy
thing is hid, although He was required of Martha as doomsman for to bid Mary rise and
help her to serve Him; nevertheless yet, for He perceived that Mary was fervently occupied
in spirit about the love of His Godhead, therefore courteously and as it was seemly for Him
to do by the way of reason, He answered for her, that for the excusing of herself list not leave
the love of Him. And how answered He? Surely not only as doomsman, as He was of Martha
appealed: but as an advocate lawfully defended her that Him loved, and said, “Martha,
Martha!” Twice for speed He named her name; for He would that she heard Him and took
heed to His words. “Thou art full busy,” He said, “and troubled about many things.” For
they that be actives behove always to be busied and travailed about many diverse things, the
which them falleth, first for to have to their own use, and sithen in deeds of mercy to their
even-christian, as charity asketh. And this He said unto Martha, for He would let her wit
that her business was good and profitable to the health of her soul. But for this, that she
should not think that it were the best work of all that man might do, therefore He added
and said: ‘But one thing is necessary.’
And what is that one thing? Surely that God be loved and praised by Himself, above
all other business bodily or ghostly that man may do. And for this, that Martha should not
think that she might both love God and praise Him above all other business bodily or ghostly,
and also thereto to be busy about the necessaries of this life: therefore to deliver her of doubt
that she might not both serve God in bodily business and ghostly together perfectly-—imperfectly she may, but not perfectly—He added and said, that Mary had chosen the best
part; the which should never be taken from her. For why, that perfect stirring of love that
beginneth here is even in number with that that shall last without end in the bliss of heaven,
for all it is but one.

51

Chapter 21: The true exposition of this gospel word, 'Mary hath chosen the…

HERE BEGINNETH THE ONE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
The true exposition of this gospel word, “Mary hath chosen the best part.”
WHAT meaneth this; Mary hath chosen the best? Wheresoever the best is set or named, it
asketh before it these two things—a good, and a better; so that it be the best, and the third
in number. But which be these three good things, of the which Mary chose the best? Three
lives be they not, for Holy Church maketh remembrance but of two, active life and contemplative life; the which two lives be privily understood in the story of this gospel by these two
sisters Martha and Mary—by Martha active, by Mary contemplative. Without one of these
two lives may no man be safe, and where no more be but two, may no man choose the best.
But although there be but two lives, nevertheless yet in these two lives be three parts,
each one better than other. The which three, each one by itself, be specially set in their places
before in this writing. For as it is said before, the first part standeth in good and honest
bodily works of mercy and of charity; and this is the first degree of active life, as it is said
before. The second part of these two lives lieth in good ghostly meditations of a man’s own
wretchedness, the Passion of Christ, and of the joys of heaven. The first part is good, and
this part is the better; for this is the second degree of active life and the first of contemplative
life. In this part is contemplative life and active life coupled together in ghostly kinship, and
made sisters at the ensample of Martha and Mary. Thus high may an active come to contemplation; and no higher, but if it be full seldom and by a special grace. Thus low may a contemplative come towards active life; and no lower, but if it be full seldom and in great need.
The third part of these two lives hangeth in this dark cloud of unknowing, with
many a privy love pressed to God by Himself. The first part is good, the second is better,
but the third is best of all. This is the “best part” of Mary. And therefore it is plainly to wit,
that our Lord said not, Mary hath chosen the best life; for there be no more lives but two,
and of two may no man choose the best. But of these two lives Mary hath chosen, He said,
the best part; the which shall never be taken from her. The first part and the second, although
they be both good and holy, yet they end with this life. For in the tother life shall be no need
as now to use the works of mercy, nor to weep for our wretchedness, nor for the Passion of
Christ. For then shall none be able to hunger nor thirst as now, nor die for cold, nor be sick,
nor houseless, nor in prison; nor yet need burial, for then shall none be able to die. But the
third part that Mary chose, choose who by grace is called to choose: or, if I soothlier shall
say, whoso is chosen thereto of God. Let him lustily incline thereto, for that shall never be
taken away: for if it begin here, it shall last without end.

52

Chapter 21: The true exposition of this gospel word, 'Mary hath chosen the…

And therefore let the voice of our Lord cry on these actives, as if He said thus now
for us unto them, as He did then for Mary to Martha, “Martha, Martha!”—“Actives, actives!
make you as busy as ye can in the first part and in the second, now in the one and now in
the tother: and, if you list right well and feel you disposed, in both two bodily. And meddle
you not of contemplatives. Ye wot not what them aileth: let them sit in their rest and in their
play, with the third and the best part of Mary.”

53

Chapter 22: Of the wonderful love that Christ had to man in person of all…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TWO AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
Of the wonderful love that Christ had to man in person of all sinners truly turned
and called to the grace of contemplation.
SWEET was that love betwixt our Lord and Mary. Much love had she to Him. Much more
had He to her. For whoso would utterly behold all the behaviour that was betwixt Him and
her, not as a trifler may tell, but as the story of the gospel will witness—the which on nowise
may be false—he should find that she was so heartily set for to love Him, that nothing beneath
Him might comfort her, nor yet hold her heart from Him. This is she, that same Mary, that
when she sought Him at the sepulchre with weeping cheer would not be comforted of angels.
For when they spake unto her so sweetly and so lovely and said, “Weep not, Mary; for why,
our Lord whom thou seekest is risen, and thou shalt have Him, and see Him live full fair
amongst His disciples in Galilee as He hight,” she would not cease for them. For why? Her
thought that whoso sought verily the King of Angels, them list not cease for angels.
And what more? Surely whoso will look verily in the story of the gospel, he shall
find many wonderful points of perfect love written of her to our ensample, and as even according to the work of this writing, as if they had been set and written therefore; and surely
so were they, take whoso take may. And if a man list for to see in the gospel written the
wonderful and the special love that our Lord had to her, in person of all accustomed sinners
truly turned and called to the grace of contemplation, he shall find that our Lord might not
suffer any man or woman—yea, not her own sister—speak a word against her, but if He
answered for her Himself. Yea, and what more? He blamed Symon Leprous in his own
house, for that he thought against her. This was great love: this was passing love.

54

Chapter 23: How God will answer and purvey for them in spirit, that for…

HERE BEGINNETH THE THREE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
How God will answer and purvey for them in spirit, that for business about His
love list not answer nor purvey for themselves
AND truly an we will lustily conform our love and our living, inasmuch as in us is, by grace
and by counsel, unto the love and the living of Mary, no doubt but He shall answer on the
same manner now for us ghostly each day, privily in the hearts of all those that either say
or think against us. I say not but that evermore some men shall say or think somewhat
against us, the whiles we live in the travail of this life, as they did against Mary. But I say,
an we will give no more heed to their saying nor to their thinking, nor no more cease of our
ghostly privy work for their words and their thoughts, than she did—I say, then, that our
Lord shall answer them in spirit, if it shall be well with them that so say and so think, that
they shall within few days have shame of their words and their thoughts.
And as He will answer for us thus in spirit, so will He stir other men in spirit to give
us our needful things that belong to this life, as meat and clothes with all these other; if He
see that we will not leave the work of His love for business about them. And this I say in
confusion of their error, that say that it is not lawful for men to set them to serve God in
contemplative life, but if they be secure before of their bodily necessaries. For they say, that
God sendeth the cow, but not by the horn. And truly they say wrong of God, as they well
know. For trust steadfastly, thou whatsoever that thou be, that truly turnest thee from the
world unto God, that one of these two God shall send thee, without business of thyself: and
that is either abundance of necessaries, or strength in body and patience in spirit to bear
need. What then recketh it, which man have? for all come to one in very contemplatives.
And whoso is in doubt of this, either the devil is in his breast and reeveth him of belief, or
else he is not yet truly turned to God as he should be; make he it never so quaint, nor never
so holy reasons shew there again, whatnot ever that he be.
And therefore thou, that settest thee to be contemplative as Mary was, choose thee
rather to be meeked under the wonderful height and the worthiness of God, the which is
perfect, than under thine own wretchedness, the which is imperfect: that is to say, look that
thy special beholding be more to the worthiness of God than to thy wretchedness. For to
them that be perfectly meeked, no thing shall defail; neither bodily thing, nor ghostly. For
why? They have God, in whom is all plenty; and whoso hath Him—yea, as this book telleth—him needeth nought else in this life.

55

Chapter 24: What charity is in itself, and how it is truly and perfectly…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
What charity is in itself, and how it is truly and perfectly contained in the work
of this book.
AND as it is said of meekness, how that it is truly and perfectly comprehended in this little
blind love pressed, when it is beating upon this dark cloud of unknowing, all other things
put down and forgotten: so it is to be understood of all other virtues, and specially of charity.
For charity is nought else to bemean to thine understanding, but love of God for
Himself above all creatures, and of man for God even as thyself. And that in this work God
is loved for Himself, and above all creatures, it seemeth right well. For as it is said before,
that the substance of this work is nought else but a naked intent directed unto God for
Himself.
A naked intent I call it. For why, in this work a perfect Prentice asketh neither releasing of pain, nor increasing of meed, nor shortly to say, nought but Himself. Insomuch,
that neither he recketh nor looketh after whether that he be in pain or in bliss, else that His
will be fulfilled that he loveth. And thus it seemeth that in this work God is perfectly loved
for Himself, and that above all creatures. For in this work, a perfect worker may not suffer
the memory of the holiest creature that ever God made to commune with him.
And that in this work the second and the lower branch of charity unto thine evenchristian is verily and perfectly fulfilled, it seemeth by the proof. For why, in this work a
perfect worker hath no special beholding unto any man by himself, whether that he be kin
or stranger, friend or foe. For all men him thinks equally kin unto him, and no man stranger.
All men him thinks be his friends, and none his foes. Insomuch, that him thinks all those
that pain him and do him disease in this life, they be his full and his special friends: and him
thinketh, that he is stirred to will them as much good, as he would to the homeliest friend
that he hath.

56

Chapter 25: That in the time of this work a perfect soul hath no special…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIVE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
That in the time of this work a perfect soul hath no special beholding to any one
man in this life.
I SAY not that in this work he shall have a special beholding to any man in this life, whether
that he be friend or foe, kin or stranger; for that may not be if this work shall perfectly be
done, as it is when all things under God be fully forgotten, as falleth for this work. But I say
that he shall be made so virtuous and so charitable by the virtue of this work, that his will
shall be afterwards, when he condescendeth to commune or to pray for his even-christian—not from all this work, for that may not be without great sin, but from the height of
this work, the which is speedful and needful to do some time as charity asketh—as specially
then directed to his foe as to his friend, his stranger as his kin. Yea, and some time more to
his foe than to his friend.
Nevertheless, in this work he hath no leisure to look after who is his friend or his
foe, his kin or his stranger. I say not but he shall feel some time—yea, full oft—his affection
more homely to one, two, or three, than to all these other: for that is lawful to be, for many
causes as charity asketh. For such an homely affection felt Christ to John and unto Mary,
and unto Peter before many others. But I say, that in the time of this work shall all be equally
homely unto him; for he shall feel then no cause, but only God. So that all shall be loved
plainly and nakedly for God, and as well as himself.
For as all men were lost in Adam and all men that with work will witness their will
of salvation are saved or shall be by virtue of the Passion of only Christ: not in the same
manner, but as it were in the same manner, a soul that is perfectly disposed to this work,
and oned thus to God in spirit as the proof of this work witnesseth, doth that in it is to make
all men as perfect in this work as itself is. For right as if a limb of our body feeleth sore, all
the tother limbs be pained and diseased therefore, or if a limb fare well, all the remnant be
gladded therewith—right so is it ghostly of all the limbs of Holy Church. For Christ is our
head, and we be the limbs if we be in charity: and whoso will be a perfect disciple of our
Lord’s, him behoveth strain up his spirit in this work ghostly, for the salvation of all his
brethren and sisters in nature, as our Lord did His body on the Cross. And how? Not only
for His friends and His kin and His homely lovers, but generally for all mankind, without
any special beholding more to one than to another. For all that will leave sin and ask mercy
shall be saved through the virtue of His Passion. And as it is said of meekness and charity,
so it is to be understood of all other virtues. For all they be truly comprehended in this little
pressing of love, touched before.

57

Chapter 26: That without full special grace, or long use in common grace,…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SIX AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
That without full special grace, or long use in common grace, the work of this
book is right travailous; and in this work, which is the work of the soul helped by
grace, and which is the work of only God.
AND therefore travail fast awhile, and beat upon this high cloud of unknowing, and rest
afterward. Nevertheless, a travail shall he have who so shall use him in this work; yea, surely!
and that a full great travail, unless he have a more special grace, or else that he have of long
time used him therein.
But I pray thee, wherein shall that travail be? Surely not in that devout stirring of
love that is continually wrought in his will, not by himself, but by the hand of Almighty
God: the which is evermore ready to work this work in each soul that is disposed thereto,
and that doth that in him is, and hath done long time before, to enable him to this work.
But wherein then is this travail, I pray thee? Surely, this travail is all in treading
down of the remembrance of all the creatures that ever God made, and in holding of them
under the cloud of forgetting named before. In this is all the travail, for this is man’s travail,
with help of grace. And the tother above—that is to say, the stirring of love—that is the work
of only God. And therefore do on thy work, and surely I promise thee He shall not fail in
His.
Do on then fast; let see how thou bearest thee. Seest thou not how He standeth and
abideth thee? For shame! Travail fast but awhile, and thou shalt soon be eased of the greatness
and of the hardness of this travail. For although it be hard and strait in the beginning, when
thou hast no devotion; nevertheless yet after, when thou hast devotion, it shall be made full
restful and full light unto thee that before was full hard. And thou shalt have either little
travail or none, for then will God work sometimes all by Himself. But not ever, nor yet no
long time together, but when Him list and as Him list; and then wilt thou think it merry to
let Him alone.
Then will He sometimes peradventure send out a beam of ghostly light, piercing
this cloud of unknowing that is betwixt thee and Him; and shew thee some of His privity,
the which man may not, nor cannot speak. Then shalt thou feel thine affection inflamed
with the fire of His love, far more than I can tell thee, or may or will at this time. For of that
work, that falleth to only God, dare I not take upon me to speak with my blabbering fleshly
tongue: and shortly to say, although I durst I would do not. But of that work that falleth to
man when he feeleth him stirred and helped by grace, list me well tell thee: for therein is
the less peril of the two.

58

Chapter 27: Who should work in the gracious work of this book

HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVEN AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
Who should work in the gracious work of this book.
FIRST and foremost, I will tell thee who should work in this work, and when, and by what
means: and what discretion thou shalt have in it. If thou asketh me who shall work thus, I
answer thee—all that have forsaken the world in a true will, and thereto that give them not
to active life, but to that life that is called contemplative life. All those should work in this
grace and in this work, whatsoever that they be; whether they have been accustomed sinners
or none.

59

Chapter 28: That a man should not presume to work in this work before the…

HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHT AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
That a man should not presume to work in this work before the time that he be
lawfully cleansed in conscience of all his special deeds of sin.
BUT if thou asketh me when they should work in this work, then I answer thee and I say:
that not ere they have cleansed their conscience of all their special deeds of sin done before,
after the common ordinance of Holy Church.
For in this work, a soul drieth up in it all the root and the ground of sin that will
always live in it after confession, be it never so busy. And, therefore, whoso will travail in
this work, let him first cleanse his conscience; and afterward when he hath done that in him
is lawfully, let him dispose him boldly but meekly thereto. And let him think, that he hath
full long been holden therefrom. For this is that work in the which a soul should travail all
his lifetime, though he had never sinned deadly. And the whiles that a soul is dwelling in
this deadly flesh, it shall evermore see and feel this cumbrous cloud of unknowing betwixt
him and God. And not only that, but in pain of the original sin it shall evermore see and
feel that some of all the creatures that ever God made, or some of their works, will evermore
press in remembrance betwixt it and God. And this is the right wisdom of God, that man,
when he had sovereignty and lordship of all other creatures, because that he wilfully made
him underling to the stirring of his subjects, leaving the bidding of God and his Maker; that
right so after, when he would fulfil the bidding of God, he saw and felt all the creatures that
should be beneath him, proudly press above him, betwixt him and his God.

60

Chapter 29: That a man should bidingly travail in this work, and suffer…

HERE BEGINNETH THE NINE AND TWENTIETH CHAPTER
That a man should bidingly travail in this work, and suffer the pain thereof, and
judge no man.
AND therefore, whoso coveteth to come to cleanness that he lost for sin, and to win to that
well-being where all woe wanteth, him behoveth bidingly to travail in this work, and suffer
the pain thereof, whatsoever that he be: whether he have been an accustomed sinner or
none.
All men have travail in this work; both sinners, and innocents that never sinned
greatly. But far greater travail have those that have been sinners than they that have been
none; and that is great reason. Nevertheless, ofttimes it befalleth that some that have been
horrible and accustomed sinners come sooner to the perfection of this work than those that
have been none. And this is the merciful miracle of our Lord, that so specially giveth His
grace, to the wondering of all this world. Now truly I hope that on Doomsday it shall be
fair, when that God shall be seen clearly and all His gifts. Then shall some that now be despised and set at little or nought as common sinners, and peradventure some that now be
horrible sinners, sit full seemly with saints in His sight: when some of those that seem now
full holy and be worshipped of men as angels, and some of those yet peradventure, that
never yet sinned deadly, shall sit full sorry amongst hell caves.
Hereby mayest thou see that no man should be judged of other here in this life, for
good nor for evil that they do. Nevertheless deeds may lawfully be judged, but not the man,
whether they be good or evil.

61

Chapter 30: Who should blame and condemn other men's defaults

HERE BEGINNETH THE THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Who should blame and condemn other men’s defaults.
BUT I pray thee, of whom shall men’s deeds be judged?
Surely of them that have power, and cure of their souls: either given openly by the
statute and the ordinance of Holy Church, or else privily in spirit at the special stirring of
the Holy Ghost in perfect charity. Each man beware, that he presume not to take upon him
to blame and condemn other men’s defaults, but if he feel verily that he be stirred of the
Holy Ghost within in his work; for else may he full lightly err in his dooms. And therefore
beware: judge thyself as thee list betwixt thee and thy God or thy ghostly father, and let
other men alone.

62

Chapter 31: How a man should have him in beginning of this work against…

HERE BEGINNETH THE ONE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
How a man should have him in beginning of this work against all thoughts and
stirrings of sin.
AND from the time that thou feelest that thou hast done that in thee is, lawfully to amend
thee at the doom of Holy Church, then shalt thou set thee sharply to work in this work. And
then if it so be that thy foredone special deeds will always press in thy remembrance betwixt
thee and thy God, or any new thought or stirring of any sin either, thou shalt stalwartly step
above them with a fervent stirring of love, and tread them down under thy feet. And try to
cover them with a thick cloud of forgetting, as they never had been done in this life of thee
nor of other man either. And if they oft rise, oft put them down: and shortly to say, as oft
as they rise, as oft put them down. And if thee think that the travail be great, thou mayest
seek arts and wiles and privy subtleties of ghostly devices to put them away: the which subtleties be better learned of God by the proof than of any man in this life.

63

Chapter 32: Of two ghostly devices that be helpful to a ghostly beginner…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TWO AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Of two ghostly devices that be helpful to a ghostly beginner in the work of this
book.
NEVERTHELESS, somewhat of this subtlety shall I tell thee as me think. Prove thou and
do better, if thou better mayest. Do that in thee is, to let be as thou wist not that they press
so fast upon thee betwixt thee and thy God. And try to look as it were over their shoulders,
seeking another thing: the which thing is God, enclosed in a cloud of unknowing. And if
thou do thus, I trow that within short time thou shalt be eased of thy travail. I trow that an
this device be well and truly conceived, it is nought else but a longing desire unto God, to
feel Him and see Him as it may be here: and such a desire is charity, and it obtaineth always
to be eased.
Another device there is: prove thou if thou wilt. When thou feelest that thou mayest
on nowise put them down, cower thou down under them as a caitiff and a coward overcome
in battle, and think that it is but a folly to thee to strive any longer with them, and therefore
thou yieldest thee to God in the hands of thine enemies. And feel then thyself as thou wert
foredone for ever. Take good heed of this device I pray thee, for me think in the proof of
this device thou shouldest melt all to water. And surely me think an this device be truly
conceived it is nought else but a true knowing and a feeling of thyself as thou art, a wretch
and a filthy, far worse than nought: the which knowing and feeling is meekness. And this
meekness obtaineth to have God Himself mightily descending, to venge thee of thine enemies,
for to take thee up, and cherishingly dry thine ghostly eyen; as the father doth the child that
is in point to perish under the mouths of wild swine or wode biting bears.

64

Chapter 33: That in this work a soul is cleansed both of his special sins…

HERE BEGINNETH THE THREE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
That in this work a soul is cleansed both of his special sins and of the pain of
them, and yet how there is no perfect rest in this life.
MORE devices tell I thee not at this time; for an thou have grace to feel the proof of these,
I trow that thou shalt know better to learn me than I thee. For although it should be thus,
truly yet me think that I am full far therefrom. And therefore I pray thee help me, and do
thou for thee and for me.
Do on then, and travail fast awhile, I pray thee, and suffer meekly the pain if thou
mayest not soon win to these arts. For truly it is thy purgatory, and then when thy pain is
all passed and thy devices be given of God, and graciously gotten in custom; then it is no
doubt to me that thou art cleansed not only of sin, but also of the pain of sin. I mean, of the
pain of thy special foredone sins, and not of the pain of the original sin. For that pain shall
always last on thee to thy death day, be thou never so busy. Nevertheless, it shall but little
provoke thee, in comparison of this pain of thy special sins; and yet shalt thou not be without
great travail. For out of this original sin will all day spring new and fresh stirrings of sin: the
which thee behoveth all day to smite down, and be busy to shear away with a sharp doubleedged dreadful sword of discretion. And hereby mayest thou see and learn, that there is no
soothfast security, nor yet no true rest in this life.
Nevertheless, herefore shalt thou not go back, nor yet be overfeared of thy failing.
For an it so be that thou mayest have grace to destroy the pain of thine foredone special
deeds, in the manner before said—or better if thou better mayest—sure be thou, that the
pain of the original sin, or else the new stirrings of sin that be to come, shall but right little
be able to provoke thee.

65

Chapter 34: That God giveth this grace freely without any means, and that…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
That God giveth this grace freely without any means, and that it may not be come
to with means.
AND if thou askest me by what means thou shalt come to this work, I beseech Almighty
God of His great grace and His great courtesy to teach thee Himself. For truly I do thee well
to wit that I cannot tell thee, and that is no wonder. For why, that is the work of only God,
specially wrought in what soul that Him liketh without any desert of the same soul. For
without it no saint nor no angel can think to desire it. And I trow that our Lord as specially
and as oft—yea! and more specially and more oft—will vouchsafe to work this work in them
that have been accustomed sinners, than in some other, that never grieved Him greatly in
comparison of them. And this will He do, for He will be seen all-merciful and almighty; and
for He will be seen to work as Him list, where Him list, and when Him list.
And yet He giveth not this grace, nor worketh not this work, in any soul that is
unable thereto. And yet, there is no soul without this grace, able to have this grace: none,
whether it be a sinner’s soul or an innocent soul. For neither it is given for innocence, nor
withholden for sin. Take good heed, that I say withholden, and not withdrawn. Beware of
error here, I pray thee; for ever, the nearer men touch the truth, more wary men behoveth
to be of error. I mean but well: if thou canst not conceive it, lay it by thy side till God come
and teach thee. Do then so, and hurt thee not.
Beware of pride, for it blasphemeth God in His gifts, and boldeneth sinners. Wert
thou verily meek, thou shouldest feel of this work as I say: that God giveth it freely without
any desert. The condition of this work is such, that the presence thereof enableth a soul for
to have it and for to feel it. And that ableness may no soul have without it. The ableness to
this work is oned to the work’s self without departing; so that whoso feeleth this work is
able thereto, and none else. Insomuch, that without this work a soul is as it were dead, and
cannot covet it nor desire it. Forasmuch as thou willest it and desirest it, so much hast thou
of it, and no more nor no less: and yet is it no will, nor no desire, but a thing thou wottest
never what, that stirreth thee to will and desire thou wottest never what. Reck thee never if
thou wittest no more, I pray thee: but do forth ever more and more, so that thou be ever
doing.
And if I shall shortlier say, let that thing do with thee and lead thee whereso it list.
Let it be the worker, and you but the sufferer: do but look upon it, and let it alone. Meddle
thee not therewith as thou wouldest help it, for dread lest thou spill all. Be thou but the tree,
and let it be the wright: be thou but the house, and let it be the husbandman dwelling therein.

66

Chapter 34: That God giveth this grace freely without any means, and that…

Be blind in this time, and shear away covetise of knowing, for it will more let thee than help
thee. It sufficeth enough unto thee, that thou feelest thee stirred likingly with a thing thou
wottest never what, else that in this stirring thou hast no special thought of any thing under
God; and that thine intent be nakedly directed unto God.
And if it be thus, trust then steadfastly that it is only God that stirreth thy will and
thy desire plainly by Himself, without means either on His part or on thine. And be not
feared, for the devil may not come so near. He may never come to stir a man’s will, but occasionally and by means from afar, be he never so subtle a devil. For sufficiently and without
means may no good angel stir thy will: nor, shortly to say, nothing but only God. So that
thou mayest conceive here by these words somewhat (but much more clearly by the proof),
that in this work men shall use no means: nor yet men may not come thereto with means.
All good means hang upon it, and it on no means; nor no means may lead thereto.

67

Chapter 35: Of three means in the which a contemplative prentice should…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIVE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Of three means in the which a contemplative Prentice should be occupied, in
reading, thinking, and praying.
NEVERTHELESS, means there be in the which a contemplative prentice should be occupied,
the which be these—Lesson, Meditation, and Orison: or else to thine understanding they
may be called—Reading, Thinking, and Praying. Of these three thou shalt find written in
another book of another man’s work, much better than I can tell thee; and therefore it needeth not here to tell thee of the qualities of them. But this may I tell thee: these three be so
coupled together, that unto them that be beginners and profiters—but not to them that be
perfect, yea, as it may be here—thinking may not goodly be gotten, without reading or
hearing coming before. All is one in manner, reading and hearing: clerks reading on books,
and lewd men reading on clerks when they hear them preach the word of God. Nor prayer
may not goodly be gotten in beginners and profiters, without thinking coming before.
See by the proof. In this same course, God’s word either written or spoken is likened
to a mirror. Ghostly, the eyes of thy soul is thy reason; thy conscience is thy visage ghostly.
And right as thou seest that if a foul spot be in thy bodily visage, the eyes of the same visage
may not see that spot nor wit where it is, without a mirror or a teaching of another than itself;
right so it is ghostly, without reading or hearing of God’s word it is impossible to man’s
understanding that a soul that is blinded in custom of sin should see the foul spot in his
conscience.
And so following, when a man seeth in a bodily or ghostly mirror, or wots by other
men’s teaching, whereabouts the foul spot is on his visage, either bodily or ghostly; then at
first, and not before, he runneth to the well to wash him. If this spot be any special sin, then
is this well Holy Church, and this water confession, with the circumstances. If it be but a
blind root and a stirring of sin, then is this well merciful God, and this water prayer, with
the circumstances. And thus mayest thou see that no thinking may goodly be gotten in beginners and profiters, without reading or hearing coming before: nor praying without
thinking.

68

Chapter 36: Of the meditations of them that continually travail in the work…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SIX AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Of the meditations of them that continually travail in the work of this book.
BUT it is not so with them that continually work in the work of this book. For their meditations be but as they were sudden conceits and blind feelings of their own wretchedness, or
of the goodness of God; without any means of reading or hearing coming before, and without
any special beholding of any thing under God. These sudden conceits and these blind feelings
be sooner learned of God than of man. I care not though thou haddest nowadays none
other meditations of thine own wretchedness, nor of the goodness of God (I mean if thou
feel thee thus stirred by grace and by counsel), but such as thou mayest have in this word
SIN, and in this word GOD: or in such other, which as thee list. Not breaking nor expounding
these words with curiosity of wit, in beholding after the qualities of these words, as thou
wouldest by that beholding increase thy devotion. I trow it should never be so in this case
and in this work. But hold them all whole these words; and mean by sin, a lump, thou wottest
never what, none other thing but thyself. Me think that in this blind beholding of sin, thus
congealed in a lump, none other thing than thyself, it should be no need to bind a madder
thing, than thou shouldest be in this time. And yet peradventure, whoso looked upon thee
should think thee full soberly disposed in thy body, without any changing of countenance;
but sitting or going or lying, or leaning or standing or kneeling, whether thou wert, in a full
sober restfulness.

69

Chapter 37: Of the special prayers of them that be continual workers in…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVEN AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
Of the special prayers of them that be continual workers in the word of this book
AND right as the meditations of them that continually work in this grace and in this work
rise suddenly without any means, right so do their prayers. I mean of their special prayers,
not of those prayers that be ordained of Holy Church. For they that be true workers in this
work, they worship no prayer so much: and therefore they do them, in the form and in the
statute that they be ordained of holy fathers before us. But their special prayers rise evermore
suddenly unto God, without any means or any premeditation in special coming before, or
going therewith.
And if they be in words, as they be but seldom, then be they but in full few words:
yea, and in ever the fewer the better. Yea, and if it be but a little word of one syllable, me
think it better than of two: and more, too, according to the work of the spirit, since it so is
that a ghostly worker in this work should evermore be in the highest and the sovereignest
point of the spirit. That this be sooth, see by ensample in the course of nature. A man or a
woman, afraid with any sudden chance of fire or of man’s death or what else that it be,
suddenly in the height of his spirit, he is driven upon haste and upon need for to cry or for
to pray after help. Yea, how? Surely, not in many words, nor yet in one word of two syllables.
And why is that? For him thinketh it over long tarrying for to declare the need and the work
of his spirit. And therefore he bursteth up hideously with a great spirit, and cryeth a little
word, but of one syllable: as is this word “fire,” or this word “out!”
And right as this little word “fire” stirreth rather and pierceth more hastily the ears
of the hearers, so doth a little word of one syllable when it is not only spoken or thought,
but privily meant in the deepness of spirit; the which is the height, for in ghostliness all is
one, height and deepness, length and breadth. And rather it pierceth the ears of Almighty
God than doth any long psalter unmindfully mumbled in the teeth. And herefore it is written,
that short prayer pierceth heaven.

70

Chapter 38: How and why that short prayer pierceth heaven

HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHT AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
How and why that short prayer pierceth heaven
AND why pierceth it heaven, this little short prayer of one little syllable? Surely because it
is prayed with a full spirit, in the height and in the deepness, in the length and in the breadth
of his spirit that prayeth it. In the height it is, for it is with all the might of the spirit. In the
deepness it is, for in this little syllable be contained all the wits of the spirit. In the length it
is, for might it ever feel as it feeleth, ever would it cry as it cryeth. In the breadth it is, for it
willeth the same to all other that it willeth to itself.
In this time it is that a soul hath comprehended after the lesson of Saint Paul with
all saints—not fully, but in manner and in part, as it is according unto this work—which is
the length and the breadth, the height and the deepness of everlasting and all-lovely, almighty,
and all-witting God. The everlastingness of God is His length. His love is His breadth. His
might is His height. And His wisdom is His deepness. No wonder though a soul that is thus
nigh conformed by grace to the image and the likeness of God his maker, be soon heard of
God! Yea, though it be a full sinful soul, the which is to God as it were an enemy; an he
might through grace come for to cry such a little syllable in the height and the deepness, the
length and the breadth of his spirit, yet he should for the hideous noise of his cry be always
heard and helped of God.
See by ensample. He that is thy deadly enemy, an thou hear him so afraid that he
cry in the height of his spirit this little word “fire,” or this word “out”; yet without any beholding to him for he is thine enemy, but for pure pity in thine heart stirred and raised with
the dolefulness of this cry, thou risest up—yea, though it be about midwinter’s night—and
helpest him to slack his fire, or for to still him and rest him in his distress. Oh, Lord! since
a man may be made so merciful in grace, to have so much mercy and so much pity of his
enemy, notwithstanding his enmity, what pity and what mercy shall God have then of a
ghostly cry in soul, made and wrought in the height and the deepness, the length and the
breadth of his spirit; the which hath all by nature that man hath by grace? And much more,
surely without comparison, much more mercy will He have; since it is, that that thing that
is so had by nature is nearer to an eternal thing than that which is had by grace.

71

Chapter 39: How a perfect worker shall pray, and what prayer is in itself;…

HERE BEGINNETH THE NINE AND THIRTIETH CHAPTER
How a perfect worker shall pray, and what prayer is in itself; and if a man shall
pray in words, which words accord them most to the property of prayer.
AND therefore it is, to pray in the height and the deepness, the length and the breadth of
our spirit. And that not in many words, but in a little word of one syllable.
And what shall this word be? Surely such a word as is best according unto the
property of prayer. And what word is that? Let us first see what prayer is properly in itself,
and thereafter we may clearlier know what word will best accord to the property of prayer.
Prayer in itself properly is not else, but a devout intent direct unto God, for getting
of good and removing of evil. And then, since it so is that all evil be comprehended in sin,
either by cause or by being, let us therefore when we will intentively pray for removing of
evil either say, or think, or mean, nought else nor no more words, but this little word “sin.”
And if we will intentively pray for getting of good, let us cry, either with word or with thought
or with desire, nought else nor no more words, but this word “God.” For why, in God be
all good, both by cause and by being. Have no marvel why I set these words forby all other.
For if I could find any shorter words, so fully comprehending in them all good and all evil,
as these two words do, or if I had been learned of God to take any other words either, I
would then have taken them and left these; and so I counsel that thou do.
Study thou not for no words, for so shouldest thou never come to thy purpose nor
to this work, for it is never got by study, but all only by grace. And therefore take thou none
other words to pray in, although I set these here, but such as thou art stirred of God for to
take. Nevertheless, if God stir thee to take these, I counsel not that thou leave them; I mean
if thou shalt pray in words, and else not. For why, they be full short words. But although
the shortness of prayer be greatly commended here, nevertheless the oftness of prayer is
never the rather refrained. For as it is said before, it is prayed in the length of the spirit; so
that it should never cease, till the time were that it had fully gotten that that it longed after.
Ensample of this have we in a man or a woman afraid in the manner beforesaid. For we see
well, that they cease never crying on this little word “out,” or this little word “fire,” ere the
time be that they have in great part gotten help of their grief.

72

Chapter 40: That in the time of this work a soul hath no special beholding…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FORTIETH CHAPTER
That in the time of this work a soul hath no special beholding to any vice in itself
nor to any virtue in itself.
DO thou, on the same manner, fill thy spirit with the ghostly bemeaning of this word “sin,”
and without any special beholding unto any kind of sin, whether it be venial or deadly: Pride,
Wrath, or Envy, Covetyse, Sloth, Gluttony, or Lechery. What recks it in contemplatives,
what sin that it be, or how muckle a sin that it be? For all sins them thinketh—I mean for
the time of this work—alike great in themselves, when the least sin departeth them from
God, and letteth them of their ghostly peace.
And feel sin a lump, thou wottest never what, but none other thing than thyself.
And cry then ghostly ever upon one: a Sin, sin, sin! Out, out, out!” This ghostly cry is better
learned of God by the proof, than of any man by word. For it is best when it is in pure spirit,
without special thought or any pronouncing of word; unless it be any seldom time, when
for abundance of spirit it bursteth up into word, so that the body and the soul be both filled
with sorrow and cumbering of sin.
On the same manner shalt thou do with this little word “God.” Fill thy spirit with
the ghostly bemeaning of it without any special beholding to any of His works—whether
they be good, better, or best of all—bodily or ghostly, or to any virtue that may be wrought
in man’s soul by any grace; not looking after whether it be meekness or charity, patience or
abstinence, hope, faith, or soberness, chastity or wilful poverty. What recks this in contemplatives? For all virtues they find and feel in God; for in Him is all thing, both by cause and
by being. For they think that an they had God they had all good, and therefore they covet
nothing with special beholding, but only good God. Do thou on the same manner as far
forth as thou mayest by grace: and mean God all, and all God, so that nought work in thy
wit and in thy will, but only God.
And because that ever the whiles thou livest in this wretched life, thee behoveth always feel in some part this foul stinking lump of sin, as it were oned and congealed with the
substance of thy being, therefore shalt thou changeably mean these two words—sin and
God. With this general knowing, that an thou haddest God, then shouldest thou lack sin:
and mightest thou lack sin, then shouldest thou have God.

73

Chapter 41: That in all other works beneath this, men should keep discretion;…

HERE BEGINNETH THE ONE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
That in all other works beneath this, men should keep discretion; but in this none.
AND furthermore, if thou ask me what discretion thou shalt have in this work, then I answer
thee and say, right none! For in all thine other doings thou shalt have discretion, as in eating
and in drinking, and in sleeping and in keeping of thy body from outrageous cold or heat,
and in long praying or reading, or in communing in speech with thine even-christian. In
all these shalt thou keep discretion, that they be neither too much nor too little. But in this
work shalt thou hold no measure: for I would that thou shouldest never cease of this work
the whiles thou livest.
I say not that thou shalt continue ever therein alike fresh, for that may not be. For
sometime sickness and other unordained dispositions in body and in soul, with many other
needfulness to nature, will let thee full much, and ofttimes draw thee down from the height
of this working. But I say that thou shouldest evermore have it either in earnest or in game;
that is to say, either in work or in will. And therefore for God’s love be wary with sickness
as much as thou mayest goodly, so that thou be not the cause of thy feebleness, as far as thou
mayest. For I tell thee truly, that this work asketh a full great restfulness, and a full whole
and clean disposition, as well in body as in soul.
And therefore for God’s love govern thee discreetly in body and in soul, and get
thee thine health as much as thou mayest. And if sickness come against thy power, have
patience and abide meekly God’s mercy: and all is then good enough. For I tell thee truly,
that ofttimes patience in sickness and in other diverse tribulations pleaseth God much more
than any liking devotion that thou mayest have in thy health.

74

Chapter 42: That by indiscretion in this, men shall keep discretion in all…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TWO AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
That by indiscretion in this, men shall keep discretion in all other things; and
surely else never
BUT peradventure thou askest me, how thou shalt govern thee discreetly in meat and in
sleep, and in all these other. And hereto I think to answer thee right shortly: “Get that thou
get mayest.” Do this work evermore without ceasing and without discretion, and thou shalt
well ken begin and cease in all other works with a great discretion. For I may not trow that
a soul continuing in this work night and day without discretion, should err in any of these
outward doings; and else, me think that he should always err.
And therefore, an I might get a waking and a busy beholding to this ghostly work
within in my soul, I would then have a heedlessness in eating and in drinking, in sleeping
and in speaking, and in all mine outward doings. For surely I trow I should rather come to
discretion in them by such a heedlessness, than by any busy beholding to the same things,
as I would by that beholding set a mark and a measure by them. Truly I should never bring
it so about, for ought that I could do or say. Say what men say will, and let the proof witness.
And therefore lift up thine heart with a blind stirring of love; and mean now sin, and now
God. God wouldest thou have, and sin wouldest thou lack. God wanteth thee; and sin art
thou sure of. Now good God help thee, for now hast thou need!

75

Chapter 43: That all writing and feeling of a man's own being must needs…

HERE BEGINNETH THE THREE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
That all witting and feeling of a man’s own being must needs be lost if the perfection of this word shall verily be felt in any soul in this life.
LOOK that nought work in thy wit nor in thy will but only God. And try for to fell all witting
and feeling of ought under God, and tread all down full far under the cloud of forgetting.
And thou shalt understand, that thou shalt not only in this work forget all other creatures
than thyself, or their deeds or thine, but also thou shalt in this work forget both thyself and
also thy deeds for God, as well as all other creatures and their deeds. For it is the condition
of a perfect lover, not only to love that thing that he loveth more than himself; but also in a
manner for to hate himself for that thing that he loveth.
Thus shalt thou do with thyself: thou shalt loathe and be weary with all that thing
that worketh in thy wit and in thy will unless it be only God. For why, surely else, whatsoever
that it be, it is betwixt thee and thy God. And no wonder though thou loathe and hate for
to think on thyself, when thou shalt always feel sin, a foul stinking lump thou wottest never
what, betwixt thee and thy God: the which lump is none other thing than thyself. For thou
shalt think it oned and congealed with the substance of thy being: yea, as it were without
departing.
And therefore break down all witting and feeling of all manner of creatures; but
most busily of thyself. For on the witting and the feeling of thyself hangeth witting and
feeling of all other creatures; for in regard of it, all other creatures be lightly forgotten. For,
an thou wilt busily set thee to the proof, thou shalt find when thou hast forgotten all other
creatures and all their works—yea, and thereto all thine own works—that there shall live
yet after, betwixt thee and thy God, a naked witting and a feeling of thine own being: the
which witting and feeling behoveth always be destroyed, ere the time be that thou feel
soothfastly the perfection of this work.

76

Chapter 44: How a soul shall dispose it on its own part, for to destroy…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
How a soul shall dispose it on its own part, for to destroy all witting and feeling
of its own being.
BUT now thou askest me, how thou mayest destroy this naked witting and feeling of thine
own being. For peradventure thou thinkest that an it were destroyed, all other lettings were
destroyed: and if thou thinkest thus, thou thinkest right truly. But to this I answer thee and
I say, that without a full special grace full freely given of God, and thereto a full according
ableness to receive this grace on thy part, this naked witting and feeling of thy being may
on nowise be destroyed. And this ableness is nought else but a strong and a deep ghostly
sorrow.
But in this sorrow needeth thee to have discretion, on this manner: thou shalt be
wary in the time of this sorrow, that thou neither too rudely strain thy body nor thy spirit,
but sit full still, as it were in a sleeping device, all forsobbed and forsunken in sorrow. This
is true sorrow; this is perfect sorrow; and well were him that might win to this sorrow. All
men have matter of sorrow: but most specially he feeleth matter of sorrow, that wotteth and
feeleth that he is. All other sorrows be unto this in comparison but as it were game to earnest.
For he may make sorrow earnestly, that wotteth and feeleth not only what he is, but that he
is. And whoso felt never this sorrow, he may make sorrow: for why, he felt yet never perfect
sorrow. This sorrow, when it is had, cleanseth the soul, not only of sin, but also of pain that
it hath deserved for sin; and thereto it maketh a soul able to receive that joy, the which
reeveth from a man all witting and feeling of his being.
This sorrow, if it be truly conceived, is full of holy desire: and else might never man
in this life abide it nor bear it. For were it not that a soul were somewhat fed with a manner
of comfort of his right working, else should he not be able to bear the pain that he hath of
the witting and feeling of his being. For as oft as he would have a true witting and a feeling
of his God in purity of spirit, as it may be here, and sithen feeleth that he may not—for he
findeth evermore his witting and his feeling as it were occupied and filled with a foul stinking
lump of himself, the which behoveth always be hated and be despised and forsaken, if he
shall be God’s perfect disciple learned of Himself in the mount of perfection—so oft, he
goeth nigh mad for sorrow. Insomuch, that he weepeth and waileth, striveth, curseth, and
banneth; and shortly to say, him thinketh that he beareth so heavy a burthen of himself that
he careth never what betides him, so that God were pleased. And yet in all this sorrow he
desireth not to unbe: for that were devil’s madness and despite unto God. But him listeth
right well to be; and he intendeth full heartily thanking to God, for the worthiness and the

77

Chapter 44: How a soul shall dispose it on its own part, for to destroy…

gift of his being, for all that he desire unceasingly for to lack the witting and the feeling of
his being.
This sorrow and this desire behoveth every soul have and feel in itself, either in this
manner or in another; as God vouchsafeth for to learn to His ghostly disciples after His well
willing and their according ableness in body and in soul, in degree and disposition, ere the
time be that they may perfectly be oned unto God in perfect charity—such as may be had
here—if God vouchsafeth.

78

Chapter 45: A good declaring of some certain deceits that may befall in…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIVE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
A good declaring of some certain deceits that may befall in this work.
BUT one thing I tell thee, that in this work may a young disciple that hath not yet been well
used and proved in ghostly working, full lightly be deceived; and, but he be soon wary, and
have grace to leave off and meek him to counsel, peradventure be destroyed in his bodily
powers and fall into fantasy in his ghostly wits. And all this is along of pride, and of fleshliness
and curiosity of wit.
And on this manner may this deceit befall. A young man or a woman new set to
the school of devotion heareth this sorrow and this desire be read and spoken: how that a
man shall lift up his heart unto God, and unceasingly desire for to feel the love of his God.
And as fast in a curiosity of wit they conceive these words not ghostly as they be meant, but
fleshly and bodily; and travail their fleshly hearts outrageously in their breasts. And what
for lacking of grace and pride and curiosity in themselves, they strain their veins and their
bodily powers so beastly and so rudely, that within short time they fall either into frenzies,
weariness, and a manner of unlisty feebleness in body and in soul, the which maketh them
to wend out of themselves and seek some false and some vain fleshly and bodily comfort
without, as it were for recreation of body and of spirit: or else, if they fall not in this, else
they merit for ghostly blindness, and for fleshly chafing of their nature in their bodily breasts
in the time of this feigned beastly and not ghostly working, for to have their breasts either
enflamed with an unkindly heat of nature caused of misruling of their bodies or of this
feigned working, or else they conceive a false heat wrought by the Fiend, their ghostly enemy,
caused of their pride and of their fleshliness and their curiosity of wit. And yet peradventure
they ween it be the fire of love, gotten and kindled by the grace and the goodness of the Holy
Ghost. Truly, of this deceit, and of the branches thereof, spring many mischiefs: much hypocrisy, much heresy, and much error. For as fast after such a false feeling cometh a false
knowing in the Fiend’s school, right as after a true feeling cometh a true knowing in God’s
school. For I tell thee truly, that the devil hath his contemplatives as God hath His.
This deceit of false feeling, and of false knowing following thereon, hath diverse
and wonderful variations, after the diversity of states and the subtle conditions of them that
be deceived: as hath the true feeling and knowing of them that be saved. But I set no more
deceits here but those with the which I trow thou shalt be assailed if ever thou purpose thee
to work in this work. For what should it profit to thee to wit how these great clerks, and
men and women of other degrees than thou art, be deceived? Surely right nought; and
therefore I tell thee no more but those that fall unto thee if thou travail in this work. And

79

Chapter 45: A good declaring of some certain deceits that may befall in…

therefore I tell thee this, for thou shalt be wary therewith in thy working, if thou be assailed
therewith.

80

Chapter 46: A good teaching how a man shall flee these deceits, and work…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SIX AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
A good teaching how a man shall flee these deceits, and work more with a listiness
of spirit, than with any boisterousness of body
AND therefore for God’s love be wary in this work, and strain not thine heart in thy breast
over-rudely nor out of measure; but work more with a list than with any worthless strength.
For ever the more Mistily, the more meekly and ghostly: and ever the more rudely, the more
bodily and beastly. And therefore be wary, for surely what beastly heart that presumeth for
to touch the high mount of this work, it shall be beaten away with stones. Stones be hard
and dry in their kind, and they hurt full sore where they hit. And surely such rude strainings
be full hard fastened in fleshliness of bodily feeling, and full dry from any witting of grace;
and they hurt full sore the silly soul, and make it fester in fantasy feigned of fiends. And
therefore be wary with this beastly rudeness, and learn thee to love listily, with a soft and a
demure behaviour as well in body as in soul; and abide courteously and meekly the will of
our Lord, and snatch not overhastily, as it were a greedy greyhound, hunger thee never so
sore. And, gamingly be it said, I counsel that thou do that in thee is, refraining the rude and
the great stirring of thy spirit, right as thou on nowise wouldest let Him wit how fain thou
wouldest see Him, and have Him or feel Him.
This is childishly and playingly spoken, thee think peradventure. But I trow whoso
had grace to do and feel as I say, he should feel good gamesome play with Him, as the father
doth with the child, kissing and clipping, that well were him so.

81

Chapter 47: A slight teaching of this work in purity of spirit; declaring…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVEN AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
A slight teaching of this work in purity of spirit; declaring how that on one manner
a soul should shew his desire unto God, and on ye contrary unto man.
LOOK thou have no wonder why that I speak thus childishly, and as it were follily and
lacking natural discretion; for I do it for certain reasons, and as me thinketh that I have been
stirred many days, both to feel thus and think thus and say thus, as well to some other of
my special friends in God, as I am now unto thee.
And one reason is this, why that I bid thee hide from God the desire of thine heart.
For I hope it should more clearly come to His knowing, for thy profit and in fulfilling of thy
desire, by such an hiding, than it should by any other manner of shewing that I trow thou
couldest yet shew. And another reason is, for I would by such a hid shewing bring thee out
of the boisterousness of bodily feeling into the purity and deepness of ghostly feeling; and
so furthermore at the last to help thee to knit the ghostly knot of burning love betwixt thee
and thy God, in ghostly onehead and according of will.
Thou wottest well this, that God is a Spirit; and whoso should be oned unto Him,
it behoveth to be in soothfastness and deepness of spirit, full far from any feigned bodily
thing. Sooth it is that all thing is known of God, and nothing may be hid from His witting,
neither bodily thing nor ghostly. But more openly is that thing known and shewed unto
Him, the which is hid in deepness of spirit, sith it so is that He is a Spirit, than is anything
that is mingled with any manner of bodilyness. For all bodily thing is farther from God by
the course of nature than any ghostly thing. By this reason it seemeth, that the whiles our
desire is mingled with any matter of bodilyness, as it is when we stress and strain us in
spirit and in body together, so long it is farther from God than it should be, an it were done
more devoutly and more listily in soberness and in purity and in deepness of spirit.
And here mayest thou see somewhat and in part the reason why that I bid thee so
childishly cover and hide the stirring of thy desire from God. And yet I bid thee not plainly
hide it; for that were the bidding of a fool, for to bid thee plainly do that which on nowise
may be done. But I bid thee do that in thee is to hide it. And why bid I thus? Surely because
I would that thou cast it into deepness of spirit, far from any rude mingling of any bodilyness,
the which would make it less ghostly and farther from God inasmuch: and because I wot
well that ever the more that thy spirit hath of ghostliness, the less it hath of bodilyness and
the nearer it is to God, and the better it pleaseth Him and the more clearly it may be seen
of Him. Not that His sight may be any time or in any thing more clear than in another, for

82

Chapter 47: A slight teaching of this work in purity of spirit; declaring…

it is evermore unchangeable: but because it is more like unto Him, when it is in purity of
spirit, for He is a Spirit.
Another reason there is, why that I bid thee do that in thee is to let Him not wit: for
thou and I and many such as we be, we be so able to conceive a thing bodily the which is
said ghostly, that peradventure an I had bidden thee shew unto God the stirring of thine
heart, thou shouldest have made a bodily shewing unto Him, either in gesture or in voice,
or in word, or in some other rude bodily straining, as it is when thou shalt shew a thing that
is hid in thine heart to a bodily man: and insomuch thy work should have been impure. For
on one manner shall a thing be shewed to man, and on another manner unto God.

83

Chapter 48: How God will be served both with body and with soul, and reward…

HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHT AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
How God will be served both with body and with soul, and reward men in both;
and how men shall know when all those sounds and sweetness that fall into the body
in time of prayer be both good and evil.
I SAY not this because I will that thou desist any time, if thou be stirred for to pray with thy
mouth, or for to burst out for abundance of devotion in thy spirit for to speak unto God as
unto man, and say some good word as thou feelest thee stirred: as be these, “Good JESU!
Fair JESU! Sweet JESU!” and all such other. Nay, God forbid thou take it thus! For truly I
mean not thus, and God forbid that I should depart that which God hath coupled, the body
and the spirit. For God will be served with body and with soul both together, as seemly is,
and will reward man his meed in bliss, both in body and in soul. And in earnest of that
meed, sometimes He will enflame the body of devout servants of His here in this life: not
once or twice, but peradventure right oft and as Him liketh, with full wonderful sweetness
and comforts. Of the which, some be not coming from without into the body by the windows
of our wits, but from within; rising and springing of abundance of ghostly gladness, and of
true devotion in the spirit. Such a comfort and such a sweetness shall not be had suspect:
and shortly to say, I trow that he that feeleth it may not have it suspect.
But all other comforts, sounds and gladness and sweetness, that come from without
suddenly and thou wottest never whence, I pray thee have them suspect. For they may be
both good and evil; wrought by a good angel if they be good, and by an evil angel if they be
evil. And this may on nowise be evil, if their deceits of curiosity of wit, and of unordained
straining of the fleshly heart be removed as I learn thee, or better if thou better mayest. And
why is that? Surely for the cause of this comfort; that is to say, the devout stirring of love,
the which dwelleth in pure spirit. It is wrought of the hand of Almighty God without means,
and therefore it behoveth always be far from any fantasy, or any false opinion that may befall
to man in this life.
And of the tother comforts and sounds and sweetness, how thou shouldest wit
whether they be good or evil I think not to tell thee at this time: and that is because me think
that it needeth not. For why, thou mayest find it written in another place of another man’s
work, a thousandfold better than I can say or write: and so mayest thou this that I set here,
far better than it is here. But what thereof? Therefore shall I not let, nor it shall not noye
me, to fulfil the desire and the stirring of thine heart; the which thou hast shewed thee to
have unto me before this time in thy words, and now in thy deeds.

84

Chapter 48: How God will be served both with body and with soul, and reward…

But this may I say thee of those sounds and of those sweetnesses, that come in by
the windows of thy wits, the which may be both good and evil. Use thee continually in this
blind and devout and this Misty stirring of love that I tell thee: and then I have no doubt,
that it shall not well be able to tell thee of them. And if thou yet be in part astonished of
them at the first time, and that is because that they be uncouth, yet this shall it do thee: it
shall bind thine heart so fast, that thou shalt on nowise give full great credence to them, ere
the time be that thou be either certified of them within wonderfully by the Spirit of God, or
else without by counsel of some discreet father.

85

Chapter 49: The substance of all perfection is nought else but a good will;…

HERE BEGINNETH THE NINE AND FORTIETH CHAPTER
The substance of all perfection is nought else but a good will; and how that all
sounds and comfort and sweetness that may befall in this life be to it but as it were
accidents.
AND therefore I pray thee, lean listily to this meek stirring of love in thine heart, and follow
thereafter: for it will be thy guide in this life and bring thee to bliss in the tother. It is the
substance of all good living, and without it no good work may be begun nor ended. It is
nought else but a good and an according will unto God, and a manner of well-pleasedness
and a gladness that thou feelest in thy will of all that He doth.
Such a good will is the substance of all perfection. All sweetness and comforts,
bodily or ghostly, be to this but as it were accidents, be they never so holy; and they do but
hang on this good will. Accidents I call them, for they may be had and lacked without
breaking asunder of it. I mean in this life, but it is not so in the bliss of heaven; for there
shall they be oned with the substance without departing, as shall the body in the which they
work with the soul. So that the substance of them here is but a good ghostly will. And surely
I trow that he that feeleth the perfection of this will, as it may be had here, there may no
sweetness nor no comfort fall to any man in this life, that he is not as fain and as glad to lack
it at God’s will, as to feel it and have it.

86

Chapter 50: Which is chaste love; and how in some creatures such sensible…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIFTIETH CHAPTER
Which is chaste love; and how in some creatures such sensible comforts be but
seldom, and in some right oft.
AND hereby mayest thou see that we should direct all our beholding unto this meek stirring
of love in our will. And in all other sweetness and comforts, bodily or ghostly, be they never
so liking nor so holy, if it be courteous and seemly to say, we should have a manner of
recklessness. If they come, welcome them: but lean not too much on them for fear of
feebleness, for it will take full much of thy powers to bide any long time in such sweet feelings
and weepings. And peradventure thou mayest be stirred for to love God for them, and that
shalt thou feel by this: if thou grumble overmuch when they be away. And if it be thus, thy
love is not yet neither chaste nor perfect. For a love that is chaste and perfect, though it
suffer that the body be fed and comforted in the presence of such sweet feelings and weepings,
nevertheless yet it is not grumbling, but full well pleased for to lack them at God’s will. And
yet it is not commonly without such comforts in some creatures, and in some other creatures
such sweetness and comforts be but seldom.
And all this is after the disposition and the ordinance of God, all after the profit and
the needfulness of diverse creatures. For some creatures be so weak and so tender in spirit,
that unless they were somewhat comforted by feeling of such sweetness, they might on nowise
abide nor bear the diversity of temptations and tribulations that they suffer and be travailed
with in this life of their bodily and ghostly enemies. And some there be that they be so weak
in body that they may do no great penance to cleanse them with. And these creatures will
our Lord cleanse full graciously in spirit by such sweet feelings and weepings. And also on
the tother part there be some creatures so strong in spirit, that they can pick them comfort
enough within in their souls, in offering up of this reverent and this meek stirring of love
and accordance of will, that them needeth not much to be fed with such sweet comforts in
bodily feelings. Which of these be holier or more dear with God, one than another, God
wots and I not.

87

Chapter 51: That men should have great wariness so that they understand…

HERE BEGINNETH THE ONE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
That men should have great wariness so that they understand not bodily a thing
that is meant ghostly; and specially it is good to be wary in understanding of this word
“in,” and of this word “up.”
AND therefore lean meekly to this blind stirring of love in thine heart. I mean not in thy
bodily heart, but in thy ghostly heart, the which is thy will. And be well wary that thou
conceive not bodily that that is said ghostly. For truly I tell thee, that bodily and fleshly
conceits of them that have curious and imaginative wits be cause of much error.
Ensample of this mayest thou see, by that that I bid thee hide thy desire from God
in that that in thee is. For peradventure an I had bidden thee shew thy desire unto God,
thou shouldest have conceived it more bodily than thou dost now, when I bid thee hide it.
For thou wottest well, that all that thing that is wilfully hidden, it is cast into the deepness
of spirit. And thus me thinketh that it needeth greatly to have much wariness in understanding of words that be spoken to ghostly intent, so that thou conceive them not bodily but
ghostly, as they be meant: and specially it is good to be wary with this word in, and this word
up. For in misconceiving of these two words hangeth much error, and much deceit in them
that purpose them to be ghostly workers, as me thinketh. Somewhat wot I by the proof, and
somewhat by hearsay; and of these deceits list me tell thee a little as me thinketh.
A young disciple in God’s school new turned from the world, the same weeneth
that for a little time that he hath given him to penance and to prayer, taken by counsel in
confession, that he be therefore able to take upon him ghostly working of the which he
heareth men speak or read about him, or peradventure readeth himself. And therefore when
they read or hear spoken of ghostly working—and specially of this word, “how a man shall
draw all his wit within himself,” or “how he shall climb above himself”—as fast for blindness
in soul, and for fleshliness and curiosity of natural wit, they misunderstand these words,
and ween, because they find in them a natural covetyse to hid things, that they be therefore
called to that work by grace. Insomuch, that if counsel will not accord that they shall work
in this work, as soon they feel a manner of grumbling against their counsel, and think—yea
and peradventure say to such other as they be—that they can find no man that can wit what
they mean fully. And therefore as fast, for boldness and presumption of their curious wit,
they leave meek prayer and penance over soon; and set them, they ween, to a full ghostly
work within in their soul. The which work, an it be truly conceived, is neither bodily working
nor ghostly working; and shortly to say, it is a working against nature, and the devil is the
chief worker thereof. And it is the readiest way to death of body and of soul, for it is madness

88

Chapter 51: That men should have great wariness so that they understand…

and no wisdom, and leadeth a man even to madness. And yet they ween not thus: for they
purpose them in this work to think on nought but on God.

89

Chapter 52: How these young presumptuous disciples misunderstand this word…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TWO AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
How these young presumptuous disciples misunderstand this word “in,” and of
the deceits that follow thereon.
AND on this manner is this madness wrought that I speak of. They read and hear well said
that they should leave outward working with their wits, and work inwards: and because that
they know not which is inward working, therefore they work wrong. For they turn their
bodily wits inwards to their body against the course of nature; and strain them, as they would
see inwards with their bodily eyes and hear inwards with their ears, and so forth of all their
wits, smelling, tasting, and feeling inwards. And thus they reverse them against the course
of nature, and with this curiosity they travail their imagination so indiscreetly, that at the
last they turn their brain in their heads, and then as fast the devil hath power for to feign
some false light or sounds, sweet smells in their noses, wonderful tastes in their mouths;
and many quaint heats and burnings in their bodily breasts or in their bowels, in their backs
and in their reins and in their members.
And yet in this fantasy them think that they have a restful remembrance of their
God without any letting of vain thoughts; and surely so have they in manner, for they be so
filled in falsehood that vanity may not provoke them. And why? Because he, that same fiend
that should minister vain thoughts to them an they were in good way—he, that same, is the
chief worker of this work. And wit thou right well, that him list not to let himself. The remembrance of God will he not put from them, for fear that he should be had in suspect.

90

Chapter 53: Of divers unseemly practices that follow them that lack the…

HERE BEGINNETH THE THREE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
Of divers unseemly practices that follow them that lack the work of this book.
MANY wonderful practices follow them that be deceived in this false work, or in any species
thereof, beyond that doth them that be God’s true disciples: for they be evermore full seemly
in all their practices, bodily or ghostly. But it is not so of these other. For whoso would or
might behold unto them where they sit in this time, an it so were that their eyelids were
open, he should see them stare as they were mad, and leeringly look as if they saw the devil.
Surely it is good they be wary, for truly the fiend is not far. Some set their eyes in their heads
as they were sturdy sheep beaten in the head, and as they should die anon. Some hang their
heads on one side as if a worm were in their ears. Some pipe when they should speak, as if
there were no spirit in their bodies: and this is the proper condition of an hypocrite. Some
cry and whine in their throats, so be they greedy and hasty to say that they think: and this
is the condition of heretics, and of them that with presumption and with curiosity of wit
will always maintain error.
Many unordained and unseemly practices follow on this error, whoso might perceive
all. Nevertheless some there be that be so curious that they can refrain them in great part
when they come before men. But might these men be seen in place where they be homely,
then I trow they should not be hid. And nevertheless yet I trow that whoso would straitly
gainsay their opinion, that they should soon see them burst out in some point; and yet them
think that all that ever they do, it is for the love of God and for to maintain the truth. Now
truly I hope that unless God shew His merciful miracle to make them soon leave off, they
shall love God so long on this manner, that they shall go staring mad to the devil. I say not
that the devil hath so perfect a servant in this life, that is deceived and infect with all these
fantasies that I set here: and nevertheless yet it may be that one, yea, and many one, be infect
with them all. But I say that he hath no perfect hypocrite nor heretic in earth that he is not
guilty in some that I have said, or peradventure shall say if God vouchsafeth.
For some men are so cumbered in nice curious customs in bodily bearing, that when
they shall ought hear, they writhe their heads on one side quaintly, and up with the chin:
they gape with their mouths as they should hear with their mouth and not with their ears.
Some when they should speak point with their fingers, either on their fingers, or on their
own breasts, or on theirs that they speak to. Some can neither sit still, stand still, nor lie still,
unless they be either wagging with their feet or else somewhat doing with their hands. Some
row with their arms in time of their speaking, as them needed for to swim over a great water.
Some be evermore smiling and laughing at every other word that they speak, as they were

91

Chapter 53: Of divers unseemly practices that follow them that lack the…

giggling girls and nice japing jugglers lacking behaviour. Seemly cheer were full fair, with
sober and demure bearing of body and mirth in manner.
I say not that all these unseemly practices be great sins in themselves, nor yet all
those that do them be great sinners themselves. But I say if that these unseemly and unordained practices be governors of that man that doth them, insomuch that he may not
leave them when he will, then I say that they be tokens of pride and curiosity of wit, and of
unordained shewing and covetyse of knowing. And specially they be very tokens of unstableness of heart and unrestfulness of mind, and specially of the lacking of the work of this book.
And this is the only reason why that I set so many of these deceits here in this writing; for
why, that a ghostly worker shall prove his work by them.

92

Chapter 54: How that by virtue of this work a man is governed full wisely,…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
How that by Virtue of this word a man is governed full wisely, and made full
seemly as well in body as in soul.
WHOSO had this work, it should govern them full seemly, as well in body as in soul: and
make them full favourable unto each man or woman that looked upon them. Insomuch,
that the worst favoured man or woman that liveth in this life, an they might come by grace
to work in this work, their favour should suddenly and graciously be changed: that each
good man that them saw, should be fain and joyful to have them in company, and full much
they should think that they were pleased in spirit and holpen by grace unto God in their
presence.
And therefore get this gift whoso by grace get may: for whoso hath it verily, he shall
well con govern himself by the virtue thereof, and all that longeth unto him. He should well
give discretion, if need were, of all natures and all dispositions. He should well con make
himself like unto all that with him communed, whether they were accustomed sinners or
none, without sin in himself: in wondering of all that him saw, and in drawing of others by
help of grace to the work of that same spirit that he worketh in himself.
His cheer and his words should be full of ghostly wisdom, full of fire, and of fruit
spoken in sober soothfastness without any falsehood, far from any feigning or piping of
hypocrites. For some there be that with all their might, inner and outer, imagineth in their
speaking how they may stuff them and underprop them on each side from falling, with
many meek piping words and gestures of devotion: more looking after for to seem holy in
sight of men, than for to be so in the sight of God and His angels. For why, these folk will
more weigh, and more sorrow make for an unordained gesture or unseemly or unfitting
word spoken before men, than they will for a thousand vain thoughts and stinking stirrings
of sin wilfully drawn upon them, or recklessly used in the sight of God and the saints and
the angels in heaven. Ah, Lord God! where there be any pride within, there such meek piping
words be so plenteous without. I grant well, that it is fitting and seemly to them that be meek
within, for to shew meek and seemly words and gestures without, according to that meekness
that is within in the heart. But I say not that they shall then be shewed in broken nor in
piping voices, against the plain disposition of their nature that speak them. For why, if they
be true, then be they spoken in soothfastness, and in wholeness of voice and of their spirit
that speak them. And if he that hath a plain and an open boisterous voice by nature speak
them poorly and pipingly—I mean but if he be sick in his body, or else that it be betwixt

93

Chapter 54: How that by virtue of this work a man is governed full wisely,…

him and his God or his confessor—then it is a very token of hypocrisy. I mean either young
hypocrisy or old.
And what shall I more say of these venomous deceits? Truly I trow, unless they have
grace to leave off such piping hypocrisy, that betwixt that privy pride in their hearts within
and such meek words without, the silly soul may full soon sink into sorrow.

94

Chapter 55: How they be deceived that follow the fervour of spirit in condemning…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIVE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
How they be deceived that follow the fervour of spirit in condemning of some
without discretion.
SOME men the fiend will deceive on this manner. Full wonderfully he will enflame their
brains to maintain God’s law, and to destroy sin in all other men. He will never tempt them
with a thing that is openly evil; he maketh them like busy prelates watching over all the degrees of Christian men’s living, as an abbot over his monks. ALL men will they reprove of
their defaults, right as they had cure of their souls: and yet they think that they do not else
for God, unless they tell them their defaults that they see. And they say that they be stirred
thereto by the fire of charity, and of God’s love in their hearts: and truly they lie, for it is
with the fire of hell, welling in their brains and in their imagination.
That this is sooth, it seemeth by this that followeth. The devil is a spirit, and of his
own nature he hath no body, more than hath an angel. But yet nevertheless what time that
he or an angel shall take any body by leave of God, to make any ministration to any man in
this life; according as the work is that he shall minister, thereafter in likeness is the quality
of his body in some part. Ensample of this we have in Holy Writ. As oft as any angel was
sent in body in the Old Testament and in the New also, evermore it was shewed, either by
his name or by some instrument or quality of his body, what his matter or his message was
in spirit. On the same manner it fareth of the fiend. For when he appeareth in body, he figureth in some quality of his body what his servants be in spirit. Ensample of this may be
seen in one instead of all these other. For as I have conceived by some disciples of necromancy, the which have it in science for to make advocation of wicked spirits, and by some
unto whom the fiend hath appeared in bodily likeness; that in what bodily likeness the fiend
appeareth, evermore he hath but one nostril, and that is great and wide, and he will gladly
cast it up that a man may see in thereat to his brain up in his head. The which brain is nought
else but the fire of hell, for the fiend may have none other brain; and if he might make a
man look in thereto, he wants no better. For at that looking, he should lose his wits for ever.
But a perfect prentice of necromancy knoweth this well enough, and can well ordain therefore,
so that he provoke him not.
Therefore it is that I say, and have said, that evermore when the devil taketh any
body, he figureth in some quality of his body what his servants be in spirit. For he enflameth
so the imagination of his contemplatives with the fire of hell, that suddenly without discretion
they shoot out their curious conceits, and without any advisement they will take upon them
to blame other men’s defaults over soon: and this is because they have but one nostril ghostly.

95

Chapter 55: How they be deceived that follow the fervour of spirit in condemning…

For that division that is in a man’s nose bodily, and the which departeth the one nostril from
the tother, betokeneth that a man should have discretion ghostly; and can dissever the good
from the evil, and the evil from the worse, and the good from the better, ere that he gave
any full doom of anything that he heard or saw done or spoken about him. And by a man’s
brain is ghostly understood imagination; for by nature it dwelleth and worketh in the head.

96

Chapter 56: How they be deceived that follow the fervour of spirit in condemning…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SIX AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER

SOME there be, that although they be not deceived with this error as it is set here, yet for
pride and curiosity of natural wit and letterly cunning leave the common doctrine and the
counsel of Holy Church. And these with all their favourers lean over much to their own
knowing: and for they were never grounded in meek blind feeling and virtuous living,
therefore they merit to have a false feeling, feigned and wrought by the ghostly enemy. Insomuch, that at the last they burst up and blaspheme all the saints, sacraments, statutes, and
ordinances of Holy Church. Fleshly living men of the world, the which think the statutes
of Holy Church over hard to be amended by, they lean to these heretics full soon and full
lightly, and stalwartly maintain them, and all because them think that they lead them a softer
way than is ordained of Holy Church.
Now truly I trow, that who that will not go the strait way to heaven, that they shall
go the soft way to hell. Each man prove by himself, for I trow that all such heretics, and all
their favourers, an they might clearly be seen as they shall on the last day, should be seen
full soon cumbered in great and horrible sins of the world in their foul flesh, privily, without
their open presumption in maintaining of error: so that they be full properly called Antichrist’s disciples. For it is said of them, that for all their false fairness openly, yet they should
be full foul lechers privily.

97

Chapter 57: How these young presumptuous disciples misunderstand this other…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVEN AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
How these young presumptuous disciples misunderstand this other word “up”;
and of the deceits that follow thereon.
NO more of these at this time now: but forth of our matter, how that these young presumptuous ghostly disciples misunderstand this other word up.
For if it so be, that they either read, or hear read or spoken, how that men should
lift up their hearts unto God, as fast they stare in the stars as if they would be above the
moon, and hearken when they shall hear any angel sing out of heaven. These men will
sometime with the curiosity of their imagination pierce the planets, and make an hole in
the firmament to look in thereat. These men will make a God as them list, and clothe Him
full richly in clothes, and set Him in a throne far more curiously than ever was He depicted
in this earth. These men will make angels in bodily likeness, and set them about each one
with diverse minstrelsy, far more curious than ever was any seen or heard in this life. Some
of these men the devil will deceive full wonderfully. For he will send a manner of dew, angels’
food they ween it be, as it were coming out of the air, and softly and sweetly falling in their
mouths; and therefore they have it in custom to sit gaping as they would catch flies. Now
truly all this is but deceit, seem it never so holy; for they have in this time full empty souls
of any true devotion. Much vanity and falsehood is in their hearts, caused of their curious
working. Insomuch, that ofttimes the devil feigneth quaint sounds in their ears, quaint lights
and shining in their eyes, and wonderful smells in their noses: and all is but falsehood. And
yet ween they not so, for them think that they have ensample of Saint Martin of this upward
looking and working, that saw by revelation God clad in his mantle amongst His angels,
and of Saint Stephen that saw our Lord stand in heaven, and of many other; and of Christ,
that ascended bodily to heaven, seen of His disciples. And therefore they say that we should
have our eyes up thither. I grant well that in our bodily observance we should lift up our
eyes and our hands if we be stirred in spirit. But I say that the work of our spirit shall not
be direct neither upwards nor downwards, nor on one side nor on other, nor forward nor
backward, as it is of a bodily thing. For why, our work should be ghostly not bodily, nor on
a bodily manner wrought.

98

Chapter 58: That a man shall not take ensample of Saint Martin and of Saint…

HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHT AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
That a man shall not take ensample of Saint Martin and of Saint Stephen, for to
strain his imagination bodily upwards in the time of his prayer.
FOR that that they say of Saint Martin and of Saint Stephen, although they saw such things
with their bodily eyes, it was shewed but in miracle and in certifying of thing that was ghostly.
For wit they right well that Saint Martin’s mantle came never on Christ’s own body substantially, for no need that He had thereto to keep Him from cold: but by miracle and in likeness
for all us that be able to be saved, that be oned to the body of Christ ghostly. And whoso
clotheth a poor man and doth any other good deed for God’s love bodily or ghostly to any
that hath need, sure be they they do it unto Christ ghostly: and they shall be rewarded as
substantially therefore as they had done it to Christ’s own body. Thus saith Himself in the
gospel. And yet thought He it not enough, but if He affirmed it after by miracle; and for this
cause He shewed Him unto Saint Martin by revelation. All the revelations that ever saw any
man here in bodily likeness in this life, they have ghostly bemeanings. And I trow that if
they unto whom they were shewed had been so ghostly, or could have conceived their bemeanings ghostly, that then they had never been shewed bodily. And therefore let us pick
off the rough bark, and feed us off the sweet kernel.
But how? Not as these heretics do, the which be well likened to madmen having
this custom, that ever when they have drunken of a fair cup, cast it to the wall and break it.
Thus should not we do if we will well do. For we should not so feed us of the fruit, that we
should despise the tree; nor so drink, that we should break the cup when we have drunken.
The tree and the cup I call this visible miracle, and all seemly bodily observances, that is
according and not letting the work of the spirit. The fruit and the drink I call the ghostly
bemeaning of these visible miracles, and of these seemly bodily observances: as is lifting up
of our eyes and our hands unto heaven. If they be done by stirring of the spirit, then be they
well done; and else be they hypocrisy, and then be they false. If they be true and contain in
them ghostly fruit, why should they then be despised? For men will kiss the cup for wine is
therein.
And what thereof, though our Lord when He ascended to heaven bodily took His
way upwards into the clouds, seen of His mother and His disciples with their bodily eyes?
Should we therefore in our ghostly work ever stare upwards with our bodily eyes, to look
after Him if we may see Him sit bodily in heaven, or else stand, as Saint Stephen did? Nay,
surely He shewed Him not unto Saint Stephen bodily in heaven, because that He would give
us ensample that we should in our ghostly work look bodily up into heaven if we might see

99

Chapter 58: That a man shall not take ensample of Saint Martin and of Saint…

Him as Saint Stephen did, either standing, or sitting, or else lying. For howso His body is
in heaven—standing, sitting, or lying—wots no man. And it needeth not more to be witted,
but that His body is oned with the soul, without departing. The body and the soul, the which
is the manhood, is oned with the Godhead without departing also. Of His sitting, His
standing, His lying, needeth it not to wit; but that He is there as Him list, and hath Him in
body as most seemly is unto Him for to be. For if He shew Him lying, or standing, or sitting,
by revelation bodily to any creature in this life, it is done for some ghostly bemeaning: and
not for no manner of bodily bearing that He hath in heaven. See by ensample. By standing
is understood a readiness of helping. And therefore it is said commonly of one friend to
another, when he is in bodily battle: “Bear thee well, fellow, and fight fast, and give not up
the battle over lightly; for I shall stand by thee.” He meaneth not only bodily standing; for
peradventure this battle is on horse and not on foot, and peradventure it is in going and not
standing. But he meaneth when he saith that he shall stand by him, that he shall be ready
to help him. For this reason it was that our Lord shewed Him bodily in heaven to Saint
Stephen, when he was in his martyrdom: and not to give us ensample to look up to heaven.
As He had said thus to Saint Stephen in person of all those that suffer persecution for His
love: “Lo, Stephen! as verily as I open this bodily firmament, the which is called heaven, and
let thee see My bodily standing, trust fast that as verily stand I beside thee ghostly by the
might of My Godhead. And I am ready to help thee, and therefore stand thou stiffly in the
faith and suffer boldly the fell buffets of those hard stones: for I shall crown thee in bliss for
thy meed, and not only thee, but all those that suffer persecution for Me on any manner.”
And thus mayest thou see that these bodily shewings were done by ghostly bemeanings.

100

Chapter 59: That a man shall not take ensample at the bodily ascension of…

HERE BEGINNETH THE NINE AND FIFTIETH CHAPTER
That a man shall not take ensample at the bodily ascension of Christ, for to strain
his imagination upwards bodily in the time of prayer: and that time, place, and body,
these three should be forgotten in all ghostly working.
AND if thou say aught touching the ascension of our Lord, for that was done bodily, and
for a bodily bemeaning as well as for a ghostly, for both He ascended very God and very
man: to this will I answer thee, that He had been dead, and was clad with undeadliness, and
so shall we be at the Day of Doom. And then we shall be made so subtle in body and in soul
together, that we shall be then as swiftly where us list bodily as we be now in our thought
ghostly; whether it be up or down, on one side or on other, behind or before, all I hope shall
then be alike good, as clerks say. But now thou mayest not come to heaven bodily, but
ghostly. And yet it shall be so ghostly, that it shall not be on bodily manner; neither upwards
nor downwards, nor on one side nor on other, behind nor before.
And wit well that all those that set them to be ghostly workers, and specially in the
work of this book, that although they read “lift up” or “go in,” although all that the work of
this book be called a stirring, nevertheless yet them behoveth to have a full busy beholding,
that this stirring stretch neither up bodily, nor in bodily, nor yet that it be any such stirring
as is from one place to another. And although that it be sometime called a rest, nevertheless
yet they shall not think that it is any such rest as is any abiding in a place without removing
therefrom. For the perfection of this work is so pure and so ghostly in itself, that an it be
well and truly conceived, it shall be seen far removed from any stirring and from any place.
And it should by some reason rather be called a sudden changing, than any stirring
of place. For time, place, and body: these three should be forgotten in all ghostly working.
And therefore be wary in this work, that thou take none ensample at the bodily ascension
of Christ for to strain thine imagination in the time of thy prayer bodily upwards, as thou
wouldest climb above the moon. For it should on nowise be so, ghostly. But if thou
shouldest ascend into heaven bodily, as Christ did, then thou mightest take ensample at it:
but that may none do but God, as Himself witnesseth, saying: “There is no man that may
ascend unto heaven but only He that descended from heaven, and became man for the love
of man.” And if it were possible, as it on nowise may be, yet it should be for abundance of
ghostly working only by the might of the spirit, full far from any bodily stressing or straining
of our imagination bodily, either up, or in, on one side, or on other. And therefore let be
such falsehood: it should not be so.

101

Chapter 60: That the high and the next way to heaven is run by desires,…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SIXTIETH CHAPTER
That the high and the next way to heaven is run by desires, and not by paces of
feet.
BUT now peradventure thou sayest, that how should it then be? For thee thinkest that thou
hast very evidence that heaven is upwards; for Christ ascended the air bodily upwards, and
sent the Holy Ghost as He promised coming from above bodily, seen of all His disciples;
and this is our belief. And therefore thee thinkest since thou hast thus very evidence, why
shalt thou not direct thy mind upward bodily in the time of thy prayer?
And to this will I answer thee so feebly as I can, and say: since it so was, that Christ
should ascend bodily and thereafter send the Holy Ghost bodily, then it was more seemly
that it was upwards and from above than either downwards and from beneath, behind, or
before, on one side or on other. But else than for this seemliness, Him needed never the
more to have went upwards than downwards; I mean for nearness of the way. For heaven
ghostly is as nigh down as up, and up as down: behind as before, before as behind, on one
side as other. Insomuch, that whoso had a true desire for to be at heaven, then that same
time he were in heaven ghostly. For the high and the next way thither is run by desires, and
not by paces of feet. And therefore saith Saint Paul of himself and many other thus; although
our bodies be presently here in earth, nevertheless yet our living is in heaven. He meant
their love and their desire, the which is ghostly their life. And surely as verily is a soul there
where it loveth, as in the body that Doeth by it and to the which it giveth life. And therefore
if we will go to heaven ghostly, it needeth not to strain our spirit neither up nor down, nor
on one side nor on other.

102

Chapter 61: That all bodily thing is subject unto ghostly thing, and is…

HERE BEGINNETH THE ONE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
That all bodily thing is subject unto ghostly thing, and is ruled thereafter by the
course of nature and not contrariwise.
NEVERTHELESS it is needful to lift up our eyes and our hands bodily, as it were unto yon
bodily heaven, in the which the elements be fastened. I mean if we be stirred of the work of
our spirit, and else not. For all bodily thing is subject unto ghostly thing, and is ruled
thereafter, and not contrariwise.
Ensample hereof may be seen by the ascension of our Lord: for when the time appointed was come, that Him liked to wend to His Father bodily in His manhood, the which
was never nor never may be absent in His Godhead, then mightily by the virtue of the
Spirit God, the manhood with the body followed in onehead of person. The visibility of this
was most seemly, and most according, to be upward.
This same subjection of the body to the spirit may be in manner verily conceived
in the proof of this ghostly work of this book, by them that work therein. For what time that
a soul disposeth him effectually to this work, then as fast suddenly, unwitting himself that
worketh, the body that peradventure before ere he began was somewhat bent downwards,
on one side or on other for ease of the flesh, by virtue of the spirit shall set it upright: following
in manner and in likeness bodily the work of the spirit that is made ghostly. And thus it is
most seemly to be.
And for this seemliness it is, that a man—the which is the seemliest creature in body
that ever God made—is not made crooked to the earthwards, as be an other beasts, but upright to heavenwards. For why? That it should figure in likeness bodily the work of the soul
ghostly; the which falleth to be upright ghostly, and not crooked ghostly. Take heed that I
say upright ghostly, and not bodily. For how should a soul, the which in his nature hath no
manner thing of bodilyness, be strained upright bodily? Nay, it may not be.
And therefore be wary that thou conceive not bodily that which is meant ghostly,
although it be spoken in bodily words, as be these, up or down, in or out, behind or before,
on one side or on other. For although that a thing be never so ghostly in itself, nevertheless
yet if it shall be spoken of, since it so is that speech is a bodily work wrought with the tongue,
the which is an instrument of the body, it behoveth always be spoken in bodily words. But
what thereof? Shall it therefore be taken and conceived bodily? Nay, but ghostly, as it be
meant.

103

Chapter 62: How a man may wit when his ghostly work is beneath him or without…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TWO AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
How a man may wit when his ghostly work is beneath him or without him, and
when it is even with him or within him, and when it is above him and under his God.
AND for this, that thou shalt be able better to wit how they shall be conceived ghostly, these
words that be spoken bodily, therefore I think to declare to thee the ghostly bemeaning of
some words that fall to ghostly working. So that thou mayest wit clearly without error when
thy ghostly work is beneath thee and without thee, and when it is within thee and even with
thee, and when it is above thee and under thy God.
All manner of bodily thing is without thy soul and beneath it in nature, yea! the sun
and the moon and all the stars, although they be above thy body, nevertheless yet they be
beneath thy soul.
All angels and all souls, although they be confirmed and adorned with grace and
with virtues, for the which they be above thee in cleanness, nevertheless, yet they be but
even with thee in nature.
Within in thyself in nature be the powers of thy soul: the which be these three
principal, Memory, Reason, and Will; and secondary, Imagination and Sensuality.
Above thyself in nature is no manner of thing but only God.
Evermore where thou findest written thyself in ghostliness, then it is understood
thy soul, and not thy body. And then all after that thing is on the which the powers of thy
soul work, thereafter shall the worthiness and the condition of thy work be deemed;
whether it be beneath thee, within thee, or above thee.

104

Chapter 63: Of the powers of a soul in general, and how Memory in special…

HERE BEGINNETH THE THREE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
Of the powers of a soul in general, and how Memory in special is a principal
power, comprehending in it all the other powers and all those things in the which they
work.
MEMORY is such a power in itself, that properly to speak and in manner, it worketh not
itself. But Reason and Will, they be two working powers, and so is Imagination and Sensuality also. And all these four powers and their works, Memory containeth and comprehendeth in itself. And otherwise it is not said that the Memory worketh, unless such a comprehension be a work.
And therefore it is that I call the powers of a soul, some principal, and some secondary. Not because a soul is divisible, for that may not be: but because all those things in the
which they work be divisible, and some principal, as be all ghostly things, and some secondary, as be all bodily things. The two principal working powers, Reason and Will, work purely
in themselves in all ghostly things, without help of the other two secondary powers. Imagination and Sensuality work beastly in all bodily things, whether they be present or absent, in
the body and with the bodily wits. But by them, without help of Reason and of Will, may a
soul never come to for to know the virtue and the conditions of bodily creatures, nor the
cause of their beings and their makings.
And for this cause is Reason and Will called principal powers, for they work in pure
spirit without any manner of bodilyness: and Imagination and Sensuality secondary, for
they work in the body with bodily instruments, the which be our five wits. Memory is called
a principal power, for it containeth in it ghostly not only all the other powers, but thereto
all those things in the which they work. See by the proof.

105

Chapter 64: Of the other two principal powers, Reason and Will, and of the…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
Of the other two principal powers Reason and Will; and of the work of them before
sin and after.
REASON is a power through the which we depart the evil from the good, the evil from the
worse, the good from the better, the worse from the worst, the better from the best. Before
ere man sinned, might Reason have done all this by nature. But now it is so blinded with
the original sin, that it may not con work this work, unless it be illumined by grace. And
both the self Reason, and the thing that it worketh in, be comprehended and contained in
the Memory.
Will is a power through the which we choose good, after that it be determined with
Reason; and through the which we love good, we desire good, and rest us with full liking
and consent endlessly in God. Before ere man sinned, might not Will be deceived in his
choosing, in his loving, nor in none of his works. For why, it had then by nature to savour
each thing as it was; but now it may not do so, unless it be anointed with grace. For ofttimes
because of infection of the original sin, it savoureth a thing for good that is full evil, and that
hath but the likeness of good. And both the Will and the thing that is willed, the Memory
containeth and comprehendeth in it.

106

Chapter 65: Of the first secondary power, Imagination by name; and of the…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIVE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
Of the first secondary power, Imagination by name; and of the works and the
obedience of it unto Reason, before Sin and after.
IMAGINATION is a power through the which we portray all images of absent and present
things, and both it and the thing that it worketh in be contained in the Memory. Before ere
man sinned, was Imagination so obedient unto the Reason, to the which it is as it were servant, that it ministered never to it any unordained image of any bodily creature, or any
fantasy of any ghostly creature: but now it is not so. For unless it be refrained by the light
of grace in the Reason, else it will never cease, sleeping or waking, for to portray diverse
unordained images of bodily creatures; or else some fantasy, the which is nought else but a
bodily conceit of a ghostly thing, or else a ghostly conceit of a bodily thing. And this is
evermore feigned and false, and next unto error.
This inobedience of the Imagination may clearly be conceived in them that be
newlings turned from the world unto devotion, in the time of their prayer. For before the
time be, that the Imagination be in great part refrained by the light of grace in the Reason,
as it is in continual meditation of ghostly things—as be their own wretchedness, the passion
and the kindness of our Lord God, with many such other—they may in nowise put away
the wonderful and the diverse thoughts, fantasies, and images, the which be ministered and
printed in their mind by the light of the curiosity of Imagination. And all this inobedience
is the pain of the original sin.

107

Chapter 66: Of the other secondary power, Sensuality by name; and of the…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SIX AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER

SENSUALITY is a power of our soul, recking and reigning in the bodily wits, through the
which we have bodily knowing and feeling of all bodily creatures, whether they be pleasing
or unpleasing. And it hath two parts: one through the which it beholdeth to the needfulness
of our body, another through the which it serveth to the lusts of the bodily wits. For this
same power is it, that grumbleth when the body lacketh the needful things unto it, and that
in the taking of the need stirreth us to take more than needeth in feeding and furthering of
our lusts: that grumbleth in lacking of pleasing creatures, and lustily is delighted in their
presence: that grumbleth in presence of misliking creatures, and is lustily pleased in their
absence. Both this power and the thing that it worketh in be contained in the Memory.
Before ere man sinned was the Sensuality so obedient unto the Will, unto the which
it is as it were servant, that it ministered never unto it any unordained liking or grumbling
in any bodily creature, or any ghostly feigning of liking or misliking made by any ghostly
enemy in the bodily wits. But now it is not so: for unless it be ruled by grace in the Will, for
to suffer meekly and in measure the pain of the original sin, the which it feeleth in absence
of needful comforts and in presence of speedful discomforts, and thereto also for to restrain
it from lust in presence of needful comforts, and from lusty plesaunce in the absence of
speedful discomforts: else will it wretchedly and wantonly welter, as a swine in the mire, in
the wealths of this world and the foul flesh so much that all our living shall be more beastly
and fleshly, than either manly or ghostly.

108

Chapter 67: That whoso knoweth not the powers of a soul and the manner of…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVEN AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
That whoso knoweth not the powers of a soul and the manner of her working,
may lightly be deceived in understanding of ghostly words and of ghostly working;
and how a soul is made a God in grace.
LO, ghostly friend! to such wretchedness as thou here mayest see be we fallen for sin: and
therefore what wonder is it, though we be blindly and lightly deceived in understanding of
ghostly words and of ghostly working, and specially those the which know not yet the powers
of their souls and the manners of their working?
For ever when the Memory is occupied with any bodily thing be it taken to never
so good an end, yet thou art beneath thyself in this working, and without any soul. And ever
when thou feelest thy Memory occupied with the subtle conditions of the powers of thy soul
and their workings in ghostly things, as be vices or virtues, of thyself, or of any creature that
is ghostly and even with thee in nature, to that end that thou mightest by this work learn to
know thyself in furthering of perfection: then thou art within thyself, and even with thyself.
But ever when thou feelest thy Memory occupied with no manner of thing that is bodily or
ghostly, but only with the self substance of God, as it is and may be, in the proof of the work
of this book: then thou art above thyself and beneath thy God.
Above thyself thou art: for why, thou attainest to come thither by grace, whither
thou mayest not come by nature. That is to say, to be oned to God, in spirit, and in love,
and in accordance of will. Beneath thy God thou art: for why, although it may be said in
manner, that in this time God and thou be not two but one in spirit—insomuch that thou
or another, for such onehead that feeleth the perfection of this work, may soothfastly by
witness of Scripture be called a God—nevertheless yet thou art beneath Him. For why, He
is God by nature without beginning; and thou, that sometime wert nought in substance,
and thereto after when thou wert by His might and His love made ought, wilfully with sin
madest thyself worse than nought, only by His mercy without thy desert are made a God in
grace, oned with Him in spirit without departing, both here and in bliss of heaven without
any end. So that, although thou be all one with Him in grace, yet thou art full far beneath
Him in nature.
Lo, ghostly friend! hereby mayest thou see somewhat in part, that whoso knoweth
not the powers of their own soul, and the manner of their working, may full lightly be deceived in understanding of words that be written to ghostly intent. And therefore mayest
thou see somewhat the cause why that I durst not plainly bid thee shew thy desire unto God,

109

Chapter 67: That whoso knoweth not the powers of a soul and the manner of…

but I bade thee childishly do that in thee is to hide it and cover it. And this I do for fear lest
thou shouldest conceive bodily that that is meant ghostly.

110

Chapter 68: That nowhere bodily, is everywhere ghostly; and how our outer…

HERE BEGINNETH THE EIGHT AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
That nowhere bodily, is everywhere ghostly; and how our outer man calleth the
word of this book nought.
AND on the same manner, where another man would bid thee gather thy powers and thy
wits wholly within thyself, and worship God there—although he say full well and full truly,
yea! and no man trulier, an he be well conceived—yet for fear of deceit and bodily conceiving
of his words, me list not bid thee do so. But thus will I bid thee. Look on nowise that thou
be within thyself. And shortly, without thyself will I not that thou be, nor yet above, nor
behind, nor on one side, nor on other.
“Where then,” sayest thou, “shall I be? Nowhere, by thy tale!” Now truly thou sayest
well; for there would I have thee. For why, nowhere bodily, is everywhere ghostly. Look then
busily that thy ghostly work be nowhere bodily; and then wheresoever that that thing is, on
the which thou wilfully workest in thy mind in substance, surely there art thou in spirit, as
verily as thy body is in that place that thou art bodily. And although thy bodily wits can find
there nothing to feed them on, for them think it nought that thou dost, yea! do on then this
nought, and do it for God’s love. And let not therefore, but travail busily in that nought with
a waking desire to will to have God that no man may know. For I tell thee truly, that I had
rather be so nowhere bodily, wrestling with that blind nought, than to be so great a lord
that I might when I would be everywhere bodily, merrily playing with all this ought as a
lord with his own.
Let be this everywhere and this ought, in comparison or this nowhere and this
nought. Reck thee never if thy wits cannot reason of this nought; for surely, I love it much
the better. It is so worthy a thing in itself, that they cannot reason thereupon. This nought
may better be felt than seen: for it is full blind and full dark to them that have but little while
looked thereupon. Nevertheless, if I shall soothlier say, a soul is more blinded in feeling of
it for abundance of ghostly light, than for any darkness or wanting of bodily light. What is
he that calleth it nought? Surely it is our outer man, and not our inner. Our inner man calleth
it All; for of it he is well learned to know the reason of all things bodily or ghostly, without
any special beholding to any one thing by itself.

111

Chapter 69: How that a man's affection is marvelously changed in ghostly…

HERE BEGINNETH THE NINE AND SIXTIETH CHAPTER
How that a man’s affection is marvelously changed in ghostly feeling of this
nought, when it is nowhere wrought.
WONDERFULLY is a man’s affection varied in ghostly feeling of this nought when it is
nowhere wrought. For at the first time that a soul looketh thereupon, it shall find all the
special deeds of sin that ever he did since he was born, bodily or ghostly, privily or darkly
painted thereupon. And howsoever that he turneth it about, evermore they will appear before
his eyes; until the time be, that with much hard travail, many sore sighings, and many bitter
weepings, he have in great part washed them away. Sometime in this travail him think that
it is to look thereupon as on hell; for him think that he despaireth to win to perfection of
ghostly rest out of that pain. Thus far inwards come many, but for greatness of pain that
they feel and for lacking of comfort, they go back in beholding of bodily things: seeking
fleshly comforts without, for lacking of ghostly they have not yet deserved, as they should
if they had abided.
For he that abideth feeleth sometime some comfort, and hath some hope of perfection; for he feeleth and seeth that many of his fordone special sins be in great part by help
of grace rubbed away. Nevertheless yet ever among he feeleth pain, but he thinketh that it
shall have an end, for it waxeth ever less and less. And therefore he calleth it nought else but
purgatory. Sometime he can find no special sin written thereupon, but yet him think that
sin is a lump, he wot never what, none other thing than himself; and then it may be called
the base and the pain of the original sin. Sometime him think that it is paradise or heaven,
for diverse wonderful sweetness and comforts, joys and blessed virtues that he findeth
therein. Sometime him think it God, for peace and rest that he findeth therein.
Yea! think what he think will; for evermore he shall find it a cloud of unknowing,
that is betwixt him and his God.

112

Chapter 70: That right as by the defailing of our bodily wits we begin more…

HERE BEGINNETH THE SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
That right as by the defailing of our bodily wits we begin more readily to come
to knowing of ghostly things, so by the defailing of our ghostly wits we begin most
readily to come to the knowledge of God, such as is possible by grace to be had here.
AND therefore travail fast in this nought, and this nowhere, and leave thine outward bodily
wits and all that they work in: for I tell thee truly, that this work may not be conceived by
them.
For by thine eyes thou mayest not conceive of anything, unless it be by the length
and the breadth, the smallness and the greatness, the roundness and the squareness, the
farness and the nearness, and the colour of it. And by thine ears, nought but noise or some
manner of sound. By thine nose, nought but either stench or savour. And by thy taste,
nought but either sour or sweet, salt or fresh, bitter or liking. And by thy feeling, nought
but either hot or cold, hard or tender, soft or sharp. And truly, neither hath God nor ghostly
things none of these qualities nor quantities. And therefore leave thine outward wits, and
work not with them, neither within nor without: for all those that set them to be ghostly
workers within, and ween that they should either hear, smell, or see, taste or feel, ghostly
things, either within them or without, surely they be deceived, and work wrong against the
course of nature.
For by nature they be ordained, that with them men should have knowing of all
outward bodily things, and on nowise by them come to the knowing of ghostly things. I
mean by their works. By their failings we may, as thus: when we read or hear speak of some
certain things, and thereto conceive that our outward wits cannot tell us by no quality what
those things be, then we may be verily certified that those things be ghostly things, and not
bodily things.
On this same manner ghostly it fareth within our ghostly wits, when we travail
about the knowing of God Himself. For have a man never so much ghostly understanding
in knowing of all made ghostly things, yet may he never by the work of his understanding
come to the knowing of an unmade ghostly thing: the which is nought but God. But by the
failing it may: for why, that thing that it faileth in is nothing else but only God. And therefore
it was that Saint Denis said, the most goodly knowing of God is that, the which is known by
unknowing. And truly, whoso will look in Denis’ books, he shall find that his words will
clearly affirm all that I have said or shall say, from the beginning of this treatise to the end.
On otherwise than thus, list me not cite him, nor none other doctor, for me at this time. For
sometime, men thought it meekness to say nought of their own heads, unless they affirmed

113

Chapter 70: That right as by the defailing of our bodily wits we begin more…

it by Scripture and doctors’ words: and now it is turned into curiosity, and shewing of cunning. To thee it needeth not, and therefore I do it not. For whoso hath ears, let him hear,
and whoso is stirred for to trow, let him trow: for else, shall they not.

114

Chapter 71: That some may not come to feel the perfection of this work but…

HERE BEGINNETH THE ONE AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
That some may not come to feel the perfection of this work but in time of ravishing,
and some may have it when they will, in the common state of man’s soul.
SOME think this matter so hard and so fearful, that they say it may not be come to without
much strong travail coming before, nor conceived but seldom, and that but in the time of
ravishing. And to these men will I answer as feebly as I can, and say, that it is all at the ordinance and the disposition of God, after their ableness in soul that this grace of contemplation and of ghostly working is given to.
For some there be that without much and long ghostly exercise may not come
thereto, and yet it shall be but full seldom, and in special calling of our Lord that they shall
feel the perfection of this work: the which calling is called ravishing. And some there be that
be so subtle in grace and in spirit, and so homely with God in this grace of contemplation,
that they may have it when they will in the common state of man’s soul: as it is in sitting,
going, standing, or kneeling. And yet in this time they have full deliberation of all their wits
bodily or ghostly, and may use them if they desire: not without some letting (but without
great letting). Ensample of the first we have by Moses, and of this other by Aaron the priest
of the Temple: for why, this grace of contemplation is figured by the Ark of the Testament
in the old law, and the workers in this grace be figured by them that most meddled them
about this Ark, as the story will witness. And well is this grace and this work likened unto
that Ark. For right as in that Ark were contained all the jewels and the relics of the Temple,
right so in this little love put upon this cloud be contained all the virtues of man’s soul, the
which is the ghostly Temple of God.
Moses ere he might come to see this Ark and for to wit how it should be made, with
great long travail he clomb up to the top of the mountain, and dwelled there, and wrought
in a cloud six days: abiding unto the seventh day that our Lord would vouchsafe for to shew
unto him the manner of this Ark-making. By Moses’s long travail and his late shewing, be
understood those that may not come to the perfection of this ghostly work without long
travail coming before: and yet but full seldom, and when God will vouchsafe to shew it.
But that that Moses might not come to see but seldom, and that not without great
long travail, Aaron had in his power because of his office, for to see it in the Temple within
the Veil as oft as him liked for to enter. And by this Aaron is understood all those the which
I spake of above, the which by their ghostly cunning, by help of grace, may assign unto them
the perfection of this work as them liketh.

115

Chapter 72: That a worker in this work should not deem nor think of another…

HERE BEGINNETH THE TWO AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
That a worker in this work should not deem nor think of another worker as he
feeleth in himself.
LO! hereby mayest thou see that he that may not come for to see and feel the perfection of
this work but by long travail, and yet is it but seldom, may lightly be deceived if he speak,
think, and deem other men as he feeleth in himself, that they may not come to it but seldom,
and that not without great travail. And on the same manner may he be deceived that may
have it when he will, if he deem all other thereafter; saying that they may have it when they
will. Let be this: nay, surely he may not think thus. For peradventure, when it liketh unto
God, that those that may not at the first time have it but seldom, and that not without great
travail, sithen after they shall have it when they will, as oft as them liketh. Ensample of this
we have of Moses, that first but seldom, and not without great travail, in the mount might
not see the manner of the Ark: and sithen after, as oft as by him liked, saw it in the Veil.

116

Chapter 73: How that after the likeness of Moses, of Bezaleel and of Aaron…

HERE BEGINNETH THE THREE AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
How that after the likeness of Moses, of Bezaleel, and of Aaron meddling them
about the Ark of the Testament, we profit on three manners in this grace of contemplation, for this grace is figured in that Ark.
THREE men there were that most principally meddled them with this Ark of the Old Testament: Moses, Bezaleel, Aaron. Moses learned in the mount of our Lord how it should be
made. Bezaleel wrought it and made it in the Veil after the ensample that was shewed in the
mountain. And Aaron had it in keeping in the Temple, to feel it and see it as oft as him
liked.
At the likeness of these three, we profit on three manners in this grace of contemplation. Sometime we profit only by grace, and then we be likened unto Moses, that for all
the climbing and the travail that he had into the mount might not come to see it but seldom:
and yet was that sight only by the shewing of our Lord when Him liked to shew it, and not
for any desert of his travail. Sometime we profit in this grace by our own ghostly cunning,
helped with grace, and then be we likened to Bezaleel, the which might not see the Ark ere
the time that he had made it by his own travail, helped with the ensample that was shewed
unto Moses in the mount. And sometime we profit in this grace by other men’s teaching,
and then be we likened to Aaron, the which had it in keeping and in custom to see and feel
the Ark when him pleased, that Bezaleel had wrought and made ready before to his hands.
Lo! ghostly friend, in this work, though it be childishly and lewdly spoken, I bear,
though I be a wretch unworthy to teach any creature, the office of Bezaleel: making and
declaring in manner to thine hands the manner of this ghostly Ark. But far better and more
worthily than I do, thou mayest work if thou wilt be Aaron: that is to say, continually
working therein for thee and for me. Do then so I pray thee, for the love of God Almighty.
And since we be both called of God to work in this work, I beseech thee for God’s love fulfil
in thy part what lacketh of mine.

117

Chapter 74: How that the matter of this book is never more read or spoken,…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FOUR AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
How that the matter of this book is never more read or spoken, nor heard read
or spoken, of a soul disposed thereto without feeling of a very accordance to the effect
of the same work: and of rehearsing of the same charge that is written in the prologue.
AND if thee think that this manner of working be not according to thy disposition in body
and in soul, thou mayest leave it and take another, safely with good ghostly counsel without
blame. And then I beseech thee that thou wilt have me excused, for truly I would have
profited unto thee in this writing at my simple cunning; and that was mine intent. And
therefore read over twice or thrice; and ever the ofter the better, and the more thou shalt
conceive thereof. Insomuch, peradventure, that some sentence that was full hard to thee at
the first or the second reading, soon after thou shalt think it easy.
Yea! and it seemeth impossible to mine understanding, that any soul that is disposed
to this work should read it or speak it, or else hear it read or spoken, but if that same soul
should feel for that time a very accordance to the effect of this work. And then if thee think
it doth thee good, thank God heartily, and for God’s love pray for me.
Do then so. And I pray thee for God’s love that thou let none see this book, unless
it be such one that thee think is like to the book; after that thou findest written in the book
before, where it telleth what men and when they should work in this work. And if thou shalt
let any such men see it, then I pray thee that thou bid them take them time to look it all
over. For peradventure there is some matter therein in the beginning, or in the midst, the
which is hanging and not fully declared there as it standeth. But if it be not there, it is soon
after, or else in the end. And thus if a man saw one part and not another, peradventure he
should lightly be led into error: and therefore I pray thee to work as I say thee. And if thee
think that there be any matter therein that thou wouldest have more opened than it is, let
me wit which it is, and thy conceit thereupon; and at my simple cunning it shall be amended
if I can.
Fleshly janglers, flatterers and blamers, ronkers and ronners, and all manner of
pinchers, cared I never that they saw this book: for mine intent was never to write such thing
to them. And therefore I would not that they heard it, neither they nor none of these curious
lettered nor unlearned men: yea! although they be full good men in active living, for it accordeth not to them.

118

Chapter 75: Of some certain tokens by the which a man may prove whether…

HERE BEGINNETH THE FIVE AND SEVENTIETH CHAPTER
Of some certain tokens by the which a man may prove whether he be called of
God to work in this work
ALL those that read or hear the matter of this book be read or spoken, and in this reading
or hearing think it a good and liking thing, be never the rather called of God to work in this
work, only for this liking stirring that they feel in the time of this reading. For peradventure
this stirring cometh more of a natural curiosity of wit, than of any calling of grace.
But, if they will prove whence this stirring cometh, they may prove thus, if them
liketh. First let them look if they have done that in them is before, abling them thereto in
cleansing of their conscience at the doom of Holy Church, their counsel according. If it be
thus, it is well inasmuch: but if they will wit more near, let them look if it be evermore
pressing in their remembrance more customably than is any other of ghostly exercise. And
if them think that there is no manner of thing that they do, bodily or ghostly, that is sufficiently done with witness of their conscience, unless this privy little love pressed be in
manner ghostly the chief of all their work: and if they thus feel, then it is a token that they
be called of God to this work, and surely else not.
I say not that it shall ever last and dwell in all their minds continually, that be called
to work in this work. Nay, so is it not. For from a young ghostly prentice in this work, the
actual feeling thereof is ofttimes withdrawn for divers reasons. Sometime, for he shall not
take over presumptuously thereupon, and ween that it be in great part in his own power to
have it when him list, and as him list. And such a weening were pride. And evermore when
the feeling of grace is withdrawn, pride is the cause: not ever pride that is, but pride that
should be, were it not that this feeling of grace were withdrawn. And thus ween ofttimes
some young fools, that God is their enemy; when He is their full friend.
Sometimes it is withdrawn for their carelessness; and when it is thus, they feel soon
after a full bitter pain that beateth them full sore. Sometimes our Lord will delay it by an
artful device, for He will by such a delaying make it grow, and be had more in dainty when
it is new found and felt again that long had been lost. And this is one of the readiest and
sovereignest tokens that a soul may have to wit by, whether he be called or not to work in
this work, if he feel after such a delaying and a long lacking of this work, that when it cometh
suddenly as it doth, unpurchased with any means, that he hath then a greater fervour of
desire and greater love longing to work in this work, than ever he had any before. Insomuch,
that ofttimes I trow, he hath more joy of the finding thereof than ever he had sorrow of the
losing.

119

Chapter 75: Of some certain tokens by the which a man may prove whether…

And if it be thus, surely it is a very token without error, that he is called of God to
work in this work, whatsoever that he be or hath been.
For not what thou art, nor what thou hast been, beholdeth God with His merciful
eyes; but that thou wouldest be. And Saint Gregory to witness, that all holy desires grow by
delays: and if they wane by delays, then were they never holy desires. For he that feeleth ever
less joy and less, in new findings and sudden presentations of his old purposed desires, although they may be called natural desires to the good, nevertheless holy desires were they
never. Of this holy desire speaketh Saint Austin and saith, that all the life of a good Christian
man is nought else but holy desire.
Farewell, ghostly friend, in God’s blessing and mine! And I beseech Almighty God,
that true peace, holy counsel, and ghostly comfort in God with abundance of grace, evermore
be with thee and all God’s lovers in earth. Amen.
HERE ENDETH THE CLOUD OF UNKNOWING.

120

Indexes

Indexes

121

Index of Pages of the Print Edition

Index of Pages of the Print Edition
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36
37 39 41 43 45 46 47 48 49 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85
86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100 101 102 103 104 105 106 107 108 109 110 111
112 113 114 115 116 117 118 119 120 121 122 123 124 125 126 127 128 129 130 131 132 133 134
135 136 137 138 139 140 141 142 143 144 145 146 147 148 149 150 151 152 153 154 155 156 157
158 159 160 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 168 169 170 171 172 173 174 175 176 177 178 179 180
181 182 183 184 185 186 187 188 189 190 191 192 193 194 195 196 197 198 199 200 201 202 203
204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225 226
227 228 229 230 231 232 233 234 235 236 237 238 239 240 241 242 243 244 245 246 247 248 249
250 251 252 253 254 255 256 257 258 259 260 261 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 272
273 274 275 276 277 278 279 280 281 282 283 284 285 286 287 288 289 290 291 292 293 294 295
296 297 298 299 300 301 302 303 304 305 306 307 308 309 310 311 312 313 314 315

122

Related Books

You might also enjoy these classic Christian books from the CCEL:
Dialog of Catherine of Siena by St. Catherine of Siena
The Dialog of Catherine of Siena is a practical and compelling work of Christian mysticism.
St. Catherine of Siena, a Dominican Tertiary, wrote it "during a state of ecstasy while in
dialogue with God the Father." The book contains a dialog between the "Eternal Father"
(God the Father) and "a human soul" (St. Catherine). In it, the Eternal Father describes,
through many different analogies, allegories, and metaphors, the spiritual life of humankind.
In his description, the Eternal Father emphasizes the importance of cultivating virtue, continually praying, and the need for obedience. Written at a time of spiritual and political
upheaval, the Dialog of Catherine of Siena remains relevant even to the present day, and any
reader will profit from the sound advice throughout this dialogue. Instructive and profound,
the Dialog of Catherine of Siena inspires with a revelation from God.
Tim Perrine
CCEL Staff Writer
Formats available: PDF, Web, ePub, iBook, Kindle, and others. Visit the Kindle or iBook
store or see http://www.ccel.org/ccel/catherine/dialog.html.

Interior Castle or The Mansions by St. Teresa of Avila
Interior Castle is the work of 16th century Carmelite nun and Christian mystic St. Teresa
of Avila. She wrote Interior Castle as a spiritual guide to union with God. Her inspiration
for the work came from a vision she received from God. In it, there was a crystal globe with
seven mansions, with God in the innermost mansion. St. Teresa interpreted this vision as
an allegory for the soul's relationship with God; each mansion represents one place on a
path towards the "spiritual marriage"--i.e. union--with God in the seventh mansion. One
begins on this path through prayer and meditation. She also describes the resistance that
the Devil places in various rooms, to keep believers from union with God. Throughout, she
provides encouragements and advice for spiritual development. Beyond its spiritual merit,
Interior Castle also contains much literary merit as a piece of Spanish Renaissance literature.
A spiritually challenging book, Interior Castle stands on par with other great works of this
time, such as Dark Night of the Soul.
Tim Perrine
CCEL Staff Writer
Formats available: PDF, Web, ePub, Kindle, mp3, and others. Visit the Kindle store or see
http://www.ccel.org/ccel/teresa/castle2.html.

123

