
                         1. Bodhidharma's Empty Thus


   Raised:


               Emperor Wu of Liang asked great master Damo, "So, what is
   the primary meaning of the holy truths?"

               Mo said, "Empty thus, without holiness."

               The Emperor said, "Who is this one opposing us?"

               Mo said, "Don't know."

               The Emperor did not concur.  Damo proceeded to cross over
   the river and arrived at the kingdom of Wei.


               Afterwards the Emperor brought it up and asked the Official
   of the Annals.  The Official of the Annals said, "Does Your Highness
   still deny knowing this person?"

               The Emperor said, "Don't know."

               The Official of the Annals said, "This is the Great-being
   Guanyin (Mahasattva Avalokiteśvara.) transmitting the imprint of the
   Buddha's Heart-Mind."

               The Emperor regretted and proceeded to dispatch a messenger
   to go and beseech  [him to return].  The Official of the Annals said,
   "Your Highness do not say to send out a messenger to go fetch him. The
   people of the entire nation could go, and he still would not return."


   


                      2.  Zhaozhou’s Far-Reaching Way


   Raised:


               Zhaozhou, instructing the assembly, said, "'The
   Far-reaching Way is without difficulty, only rejecting picking and
   choosing.'  Only when there is language is there choosing or is there
   clarity.  An old monk does not exist within clarity.  Are you still
   fond of taking sides or not?"

               At that time a monk had a question: "Since one does not
   exist within clarity, what part of taking of sides is there to be fond
   of?"

               Zhou said, "I too do not know."

               Monk said,  "Venerable, since you do not know, why do you
   yet say you 'do not exist within clarity'?"

               Zhou said, "By asking, you are able to draw near the
   matter; complete the ceremonial bowing and withdraw."


   


                          3. Master Ma Was Restless


   Raised:


               Great Master Ma was restless. The chief of the courtyard
   asked, "Venerable, so what have your esteemed hopes of recent days
   been?"

               Great Master said, "Sun Face Buddha, Moon Face Buddha."


   


                         4. Deshan Carrying a Bundle


   Raised:


               Deshan arrived at Guishan carrying under his arm his
   vestment bundle and went up into the Dharma Hall.  From the east he
   crossed to the west. From the west he crossed to the east.  He turned
   his head to look around and observe and said "Without, without."
   (alt."Nothing, nothing" or "Not, not.") Then he exited.


               Xuedou's attached words say, “Investigate and expose
   completely!”


               Deshan got to the main gate and turned back saying, "I
   should not get careless either."

               Then he prepared for a dignified ceremony and again entered
   to meet together.  Guishan sat.  Next Deshan lifted and unfolded his
   sitting paraphenalia (i.e., a sitting cloth or very thin mat) and said,
   "Venerable."

               Guishan intended to take up the whisk.  Deshan then shouted
   and shook (pun with whisk) his sleeves and then exited.


               Xuedou's attached words say, “Investigate and expose
   completely!”


               Deshan turned his back on the Dharma hall, put on his straw
   sandals, and then went on foot.  When evening arrived, Guishan asked
   the Head-Seat monk,   "The coming and going newcomer, where is he?"

               The Head-Seat said, "At that time he turned his back and
   withdrew from the Dharma hall; wearing his straw sandals he exited and
   went away besides!"

               Guishan said, "In that case, then, the son will afterwards
   be guided to ascend to the top of a solitary peak to tie and weave a
   grass hut where he will have leave to laugh at the Buddhas and revile
   the ancestors."


               Xuedou's attached words say, "Frost is added on top of the
   snow."


   


                           5. Xuefeng's Rice Grain


   Raised:


               Xuefeng, teaching the assembly, said, "I pick up the entire
   great earth with my fingers and bring it like a big grain of rice from
   the paddy. I throw it away toward the area in front of you.  The
   lacquer bucket does not meet it.  I beat the universal drum begging you
   to look at it."


   


                            6.  Yunmen's Good Day


   Raised:


               Yunmen handed down words and said, "I do not ask you about
   before the 15th day has ended.   I invite you to speak using one
   sentence about after the 15^th day is done."

               He substituted himself and said, "Every day is a good day."


   


                      7.   Fayan Consults with Huichao

Raised:

               A monk asked Fayan, "Huichao is consulting, Venerable, so what is
 Buddha?"

               Fayan said, "You are Huichao."


   


                            8. Cuiyan's Eyebrows


   Raised:


               Cuiyan at the end of summer instructed the assembly and
   said, "Continuing since the first of the summer elder brothers and
   younger brothers, I clarified by words.  Observe, are Cuiyan's eyebrows
   on?"

               Baofu said, "I regard the thief's heart-mind as deceptive
   (alt. hollow, empty void)."

               Changquing said, "Alive also."

               Yunmen said, "Checkpoint."


   


                          9. Zhaozhou's Four Gates


Raised:

               A monk asked Zhaozhou, "So what is Zhaozhou?

               Zhou said, "East gate, west gate, south gate, north gate."


   


                      10.  Muzhou Robbing and Deceiving


   Raised:


               Muzhou asked a monk, "What place did you leave from
   nearby?”

               The monk then shouted.

               Zhou said, "This old monk, because of you, has one shout."

               The monk again shouted.

               Zhou said, "After three shouts and four shouts, how do you
   make it come alive?"

               The monk was speechless.

               Zhou then hit him and said, "This is the top fellow of
   robbing and deceiving."


   


                         11. Huangbo Slurping Dregs


   Raised:


               Huangbo instructed the assembly and said, "You people of
   various ranks are fellows who indeed slurp the dregs of the wine to the
   limit. In this way you travel about on your feet. At what place is
   today?  Do you even know that within the great nation of Tang there are
   no Zen teachers?"

               At that time there was a monk who stood out and said, "But
   there seems to be in the various directions those who correct disciples
   and guide assemblies, how do they make it come alive?"

               Bo said, "I did not say no Zen; only no teachers."


   


                        12.  Dongshan's Three Pounds


    Raised:


               A monk asked Dongshan, "So what is Buddha?"

               Shan said, "Three pounds of flax."


   


13.  Baling Heaping Snow

Raised:

               A monk asked Baling, "So what is the Deva lineage?"

               Baling said, "Heaping snow in a silver bowl." 


   


                      14. Yunmen's Answering Utterance


   Raised:


               A monk asked Yunmen, "So what is the teaching of a
   single/one/whole epoch?"

               Yunmen said, "Answering a single utterance."


   


                       15. Yunmen's Emptying Utterance


   Raised:


               A monk asked Yunmen, "When it is not the current function
   and not the current phenomena, at that time what is it like?"

               Men said, "Emptying a single utterance."


   


                         16.  Jingqing In the Grass


   Raised:


               A monk asked Jingqing, "This student spits. I beg the
   teacher to peck."

               Qing said, "Yet, are you able to be alive or not?"

               The monk said, "If I'm not alive, then people who encounter
   me would marvel and laugh."

               Qing said, "You too are a fellow in the grass."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   The Buddhas of old had a family style.

   The raising of comparisons incurred devaluing and stripping away.

   Child and mother do not recognize each other.

   Is there someone who is equally spitting and pecking?

   Pecking, awakening,

   Yet even so, he's in the shell.

   Valuing incurs a beating.

   Patch-robed monks under Heaven disdain fame.


   


                        17.  Xianglin's Long Sitting


   Raised:


               A monk asked Xianglin. "So, what was the intent of the
   ancestral founder coming from the west?"

               Lin said, "To sit for a long time becomes work."


   


                  18. The National Teacher's Stupa Pattern


   Raised:


                  Emperor Suzong asked National Teacher Zhong, "After your
   100 years, what object ought to be in place?"

                  The National Teacher said, "Build a particular seamless
   stupa to give to this old monk."

                  The Emperor stated, "Please teacher, what is the pattern
   of the stupa?"

                  The National Teacher was quietly respectful for long
   time and said, "Do you understand?" 

                  The Emperor said, "I do not understand."

                  The National Teacher said, "I have handed down the
   Dharma to my disciple Danyuan,, however he is fully acquainted with
   this business. Please decree that the question goes to him."

                  Afterwards, the National Teacher passed into
   transformation.

                  The Emperor decreed that Danyuan be asked, "What is this
   meaning?"

                  Yuan said, "South of Xiang river, north of the lake,"

                  Xuedou's attached words say, "A single palm does not
   make the sound of waves."

                  "In the middle there is gold sufficient for the whole
   nation."

                  Xuedou's attached words say, "A staff shaped in the
   mountains."

                  "Below the shadowless tree, we’re united in the same
   boat."

                  Xuedou's attached words say, "A peaceful sea, a clear
   river."

                  "Above the Crystal Palace, there is no knowledge."

                  Xuedou's attached words say, "Picking it up is
   finished!"


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


                  Looking back at the seamless stupa is difficult.

                  The clear and still deep pool does not allow the green
   dragon to coil up (within it).

                  The floors go down and down, the reflections go round
   and round,

                  For 1,000 ancient ages, 10,000 ancient ages, people take
   part in watching over it.


   


                           19.  Juzhi's One Finger


   Raised:


               Venerable Juzhi, whenever he was questioned, simply stood
   up one finger.


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


                  I am profoundly fond of old Juzhi for being one who
   draws out the teachings.

                  The universe comes in emptiness, more than that who
   exists?

                  Again and again, he has faced toward the blue sea and
   dropped down driftwood

                  On the waves in the night to join in welcoming blind
   turtles.


   


20.  Longya Passes The Board

 Raised:

               Longya asked Cuiwei, "So, what is the meaning of the ancestral fo
under's coming from the West?"
               Wei said, "Come, pass over the meditation board and give it to me
."
               Ya passed over the meditation board to give it to Cuiwei. Wei rec
eived it and then was able to hit him.
               Ya said, "If you hit, then I'll allow the hit; essentially, howev
er it is not the meaning of the ancestral founder's coming from the west."
               Ya also asked Linji, "So, what is the meaning of the ancestral fo
under's coming from the West?"
               Ji said, "Come, pass over the rush-ball (sitting cushion) and giv
e it to me."
               Ya fetched the rush-ball and passed it over to give to Linji.  Ji
 received it and was able to then hit him.
               Ya said, "If you hit, then I'll allow the hit; essentially, howev
er it is not the meaning of the ancestral founder's coming from the west."

[Xuedou's] Ode says:

Underneath Dragon Tooth Mountain the dragon is eyeless.
When has stagnant water roused the ancient wind?
If you are not able to use the meditation board and the rush-ball cushion,
You should just part from them and give them over to Mister Black.

   [Xuedou's Second] Ode says:


This old fellow even is not able to completely exhaust it and returns to complet
e the first ode.
Mr. Black handed over likewise. What did he rely on?
Stop with the sitting and leaning and you will carry on the ancestor's lamp.
Adequate for replying: The returning evening clouds have not combined;
The distant mountains are limitless layers and layers of blue.

   


                          21. Zhimen's Lotus Flower


    Raised:


               A monk asked Zhimen, "What is it like at the time the lotus
   flower has not yet gone out from the water?"

               Zhimen said, "A lotus flower."

               The monk said, "What is it like at the time gone out from
   the water?"

               Men said, "Lotus leaves."


   


                          22. Xuefeng Sees A Snake


   Raised:


               Xuefeng taught the assembly saying: "On South Mountain
   (alt: the south side of the mountain) there is a singular turtle-nosed
   snake.   You people of various ranks should take a good look."

               Changqing said, "Today within the hall, great are the
   people who lose body and lose life."

               A monk raised this to show to Xuansha.   Xuansha said,
   "Although in this way it is necessary that Elder Brother [Changqing]
   Leng be able to begin, I do not draw near like this."

               The monk said, "Venerable, how do you make it come alive?"

               Xuansha said, "Why make use of 'South Mountain'?"

               Yunmen flung down his staff towards Xuefeng and in front of
   his face made gestures of fear.


   


                       23. Baofu's Mountain Rest Stop


    Raised:


               Baofu and Changqing hiked to the rest stop on the mountain.
   Fu using his finger to point said, "Just this place on the side then is
   the summit of wonder."

               Qing said, "It is the norm as it is, but a pity to admit
   it.

               Xuedou attached words saying, "Today, sharing a hike on the
   mountain with these fellows, what is there in particular to seek?"

               Again he said, "A hundred thousand years afterwards, I do
   not say without any, only they are few."

               Afterwards it was raised to show Jingqing.  Qing said, "If
   not for Grandfather Sun, then one would see skulls throughout the
   countryside."


   


                         24. Iron Grindstone the Cow


    Raised:


               Iron Grindstone Liu arrived at Guishan.  Shan said, "Old
   cow, you came hah!"

               Grindstone said, "In the coming day at Lookout Mountain
   (Taishan) there is a great assembly to provide monks with a vegetarian
   meal.  Venerable, will you be leaving to go back there?"

               Guishan relaxed his body and lay down to sleep.

               Grindstone then left.


   


               25.  The Hermitage Master Doesn't Turn His Head


    Raised:


               The master of the Hermitage of Lotus Flower Peak picked up
   his staff to show the assembly and said, "The people of ancient times
   arrived at this place, why didn't they agree to dwell here?"

               The assembly had no words, so he substituted himself and
   said, "They did not gain strength on their journey. "

               Again he said, "When completely finished, what is it like?"

               Again he substituted himself and said, "With a chestnut
   walking stick across my shoulders I am not a person who turns my head
   around to look back.  I directly enter the 1,000 peaks and the 10,000
   peaks." And he left.


   


                        26.   Baizhang Sitting Alone


   Raised:


               A monk asked Baizhang, "So what is the peculiar matter?"

               Zhang said, "Sitting alone on Great Victory (Daixiong)
   summit."

               The monk ceremoniously bowed.

               Zhang then hit him.


   


                          27. Yunmen's Golden Wind


   Raised:


               A monk asked Yunmen, "What is it like in the season when
   the tree withers and the leaves fall?"

               Yunmen said, "The body reveals the golden wind."


   


                      28. Nanquan's Fundamental Dharma


    Raised:


               Nanquan visited Venerable Baizhang Neipan.  Zhang asked,
   "All sages accord with the superior, still is there a fundamental
   Dharma that they have not spoken for people?"

               Quan said, "There is."

               Zhang said, "How do you make it alive: 'the fundamental
   Dharma that is not spoken for people'?"

               Quan said, "It is not Heart-Mind; it is not Buddha; it is
   not things."

               Zhang said, "You have spoken too."

               Quan said, "I  am only like this.  Venerable,
   how do you make it come alive?"

               Zhang said, "I actually am not very good at knowledge, and
   I struggle to know if there is speaking or there is not speaking."

               Quan said. "I  have not learned this."

               Zhang said, "Having spoken too, I am excessive for you."


   


                            29. Dasui's Aeon Fire


   Raised:


               A monk asked Dasui, "In the void of the Aeon Fire, most
   certainly the great many thousands are altogether destroyed, but I have
   not yet discerned if this one is destroyed or not destroyed?"

               Sui said, "Destroyed."

               The monk said, "In this way then, it follows the other is
   gone too."

               Sui said, "It follows the other is gone."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   In the center of the light of the fire kalpa is the cause of setting up
   a question.

   The patch-robed monk is as if blocked by two difficult checkpoints.

   One may sympathize with the words of the one phrase "it follows the
   other..."

   Discriminations and discriminations for 10,000 miles -- solitary, the
   going and returning.


   


                          30. Zhaozhou's Big Heads


   Raised:


               A monk asked Zhaozhou, "I have heard the Venerable has
   intimately seen Nanquan; do you deny it?"

               Zhou said. "The Zhou township produces big turnip heads."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   The Zhou township produces big turnips.

   The patchrobed monks under heaven grasp at principles

   and only know the past self and the current self.

   They struggle to distinguish the white swans and the black crows.

   Robber! Robber!

   The nostrils of the patchrobed monks have already gotten pinched.


   


                       31.  Magu Shook The Ring-Staff


   Raised:


                  Magu holding his ring-staff  arrived at
   Zhangjing and went around the meditation bench three full circles,
   shook the ring-staff once and next stood there stately.

                  Jing said, "Correct, correct."

                  Xuedou attached words saying, "Mistaken."

                  Magu in addition arrived at Nanquan and went around the
   meditation bench three full circles, shook the ring-staff once, and
   next stood there stately.

                  Quan said, "Incorrect, incorrect."

                  Xuedou attached words saying, "Mistaken."

                  Magu, rich in opportunity, said, "Zhangjing said,
   'Correct', Venerable, why did you say, 'Incorrect'?"

                  Quan said, "Zhangjing immediately was correct; you were
   incorrect. Here is a strong wind turning about in place, in the end it
   is defeated and destroyed."


   


                         32.  Linji's Great Meaning


   Raised:


   Upper-Seat Ding asked Linji, "So, what is the great meaning of the
   Buddha Dharma?"

   Ji got down from the meditation (Zen) bench and seized and held him and
   gave a single slap, then held up his open palms.

   Ding stood motionless.

   A monk nearby said, "Upper-Seat Ding, why don't you bow ceremonially?"

   Ding just then bowed ceremonially and suddenly had a great awakening.


   


                           33.  Zifu's One Circle


       Raised:


                  The high official Chencao called on Zifu.

                  Fu saw him coming then drew the appearance of one
   circle.

                  Cao said, "Your disciple comes in this way, before is or
   is not manifests plainly, why still more in this situation do you draw
   the appearance of one circle?

                  Fu then shut and withdrew behind the door of his
   "ten-foot-square" (i.e., the abbot's room).

                  Xuedou said, "Chencao only possessed the one single
   eye."


   


                    34.  Yangshan Hiking on the Mountain


   Raised:


                  Yangshan asked a monk, "What place did you come from
   recently?”

                  The monk said, "Mt.  Lu."

                  Shan said, "At that time did you roam on the Five Elders
   Peak [at Mt. Lu]?"

                  The monk said, "At that time I didn't go there."

                  Shan said, "At that time the Preceptor  did
   not hike on the mountain."

                  [Later,] Yunmen said, "As these words were all for the
   cause of compassion, they have fallen into chatting in the grass."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:

   Exiting the grass, entering the grass

   Who seeks release?

   The white clouds' layer on layer,

   The scarlet sun's brilliance in brilliance;

   Turning the head and looking at the left side is without flaws,

   Glaring at the right side stops (alt., is already) old age.

   You didn't see the guy of Cold Mountain.

   Walking extremely early.

   For ten years unable to return [where he came from]

   He actually forgot the Way since the time he arrived.


   [Han Shan's verse cited  in Yuan Wu's Commentary:]


If one longs to obtain a place for a tranquil life
Cold Mountain can excel at its preservation.

   A gentle breeze puffs on the secluded pines;

   Listen closely, the sound heals excellently!

   Underneath, there is a person with white streaked hair

   Reading in a whisper Huang and Lao.

   Unable to return for ten years

   He has actually forgotten the way since he arrived.


   


                        35.  Manjusri's Three Threes


   Raised:


                  Manjusri (Wenshu) asked Wuzhu, "What place have you
   departed from recently?"

                  Wuzhu said, "The region of the South."

                  Jusri said, "So how is the Buddha Dharma kept alive in
   the region of the South?"

                  Zhu said, "Recently, few of the mendicants of the Dharma
   respect moral discipline and the rules." 

                  Jusri said, "How many assemblies?"

                  Zhu said, "Perhaps three hundred, perhaps five hundred."

                  Wuzhu asked Manjusri, "So how is it kept alive in this
   space?"

                  Jusri said, "The ordinary and sacred reside together,
   dragons and snakes mingle."

                  Zhu said, "How many assemblies?"

                  Jusri said, "Three threes [i.e., nine] in front; three
   threes in back." (alt. "Previously nine, afterwards nine." 


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   A thousand peaks coil and bend, thus the color blue indigo.

   Who says Manjusri was chatting in response?

   He was able to laugh, "How many assemblies at [Mt.] Qingliang?"

   The three threes in front take part in the three threes in back.


   


                    36.  Changsha Hiking on the Mountain


   Raised:


                  Changsha one day returned from hiking on the mountain
   and came to the Leader at the gate.

                  The Leader-Seat asked, "Venerable, what places have you
   been going to and coming from?"

                  Sha said, "I'm coming from hiking on the mountain."

                  The Leader-Seat said, "You arrived, where did you come
   from?"

                  Sha said, "In the beginning I left following the
   fragrant grasses; and then I returned chasing the falling blossoms."

                  The Seat said, "That is very much like the meaning of
   Spring."

                  Sha said, "It even excels the Autumn dew drops on the
   lotus."

                  Xuedou's attached words said, "Thank you for the words
   of reply."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   The great earth is broken into fine dust.

   Whose eyes are not opened?

   "In the beginning I left following the fragrant grasses;

   and then I returned chasing the falling blossoms."

   A feeble crane raises up a cold tree.

   A wild ape howls in an ancient tower.

   The infinite meaning of Changsha.

   Bah!


   


                         37.  Panshan Without Things


   Raised:


                  Panshan appended words saying, "The three realms are
   without things.  Where is there to seek mind?"


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   The three realms are without things.

   Where is there to seek mind?

   White clouds become a canopy.

   The flowing spring makes a harp.

   One song, two songs, there is no human comprehension.

   After the rain, in the dark pool the autumn water is deep.


   


                            38. Fengxue's Iron Ox


   Raised:


                  Fengxue, when at the government office of Ying province,
   ascended the hall and said, "The ancestral masters' imprint on the mind
   is an appearance resembling the function of the arrival of the iron
   ox.  If it leaves, then the imprint remains.  If it remains, then the
   imprint is ruined.  As it is just so, if it does not leave and does not
   remain, is imprinting then correct, or is not imprinting then correct?"

                  At that time, there was an old timer Lupi who came
   forward and asked, "Someone first class having the function of the
   arrival of the iron ox begs the teacher do not hang onto imprints (alt.
   do not hand over an imprint)."

                  Xue said. "In the habit of fishing for whales and giant
   salamanders immersed in the vast clear and still waters, yet alas, the
   frogs are strolling and rolling over in the muddy sand."

                  Pi stood still pondering.

                  Xue gave a shout and said, "Old Timer, why don't you
   speak further?"

                  As Pi was deciding how to discuss it, Xue hit him once
   with the whisk.

                  Xue said, "Can you go back and remember what you were
   able to say at first?  Try to raise it and see."

                  As Pi was deciding to open his mouth to speak, Xue again
   hit him once with the whisk.

                  The magistrate said, "The Buddha Dharma and Dharma of
   Kings are one kind."

                  Xue said, "What principle of the Way do you see in
   particular?"

                  The magistrate said, "One ought to be decisive. Not
   being decisive goes backward and invites this disorder."

                  Xue then descended from the seat.


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   Getting to catch Lupi sitting astride the iron ox,

   The spear and armor of the Three Profundities have not been frivolously
   pledged.

   The citadel of the King of Chu trespasses towards the water of the
   lineage.

   The shout has come down ordering to withdraw and reverse the flow.


   


                             39.  Yunmen's Hedge


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Yunmen, "So what is the pure Dharmakaya?

                  Men said, "A hedge in bloom."

                  The monk said, "Then in this way, when the season has
   gone what is it like?"

                  Men said, "A lion with golden fur."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   "A hedge in bloom,"

   Don't be stupid:

   The points are on the scale --- not on the pan.

   "Then in this way…"

   Extremely clueless

   "A lion with golden fur," great family, observe.


   


                            40.  Nanquan's Peony


    Raised:


                  The high official Lu and Nanquan were talking and
   paused.

                  Lu said  "Dharma Master Zhao says, 'Heaven, Earth, and I
   are the same root. The 10,000 things and I are one body.'  Ha, how
   strange"

                  Nanquan pointed to a flower in front of the hall. He
   called to the high official and said, "Nowadays people see this single
   flower as if it looks like an appearance in a dream."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   Hearing, seeing, feeling, and knowing are not each separate.

   Mountains and rivers cannot be observed in the middle of a mirror.

   When the moon in the frosty heaven sets in the middle of the night,

   Who shares the shining cold reflection in the clear and still deep
   pool?


   


                       41.  Zhaozhou Asks About Death


    Raised:


                  Zhaozhou asked Touzi, "So, what about the time when the
   person of great death returns to the living?"

                  Touzi said, "It is not permitted to go traveling by
   night; the light must be cast to arrive."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   Search.

   In the middle of life there is an eye; turning back is the same as
   death.

   Why must the jealous physician do an exam of the family?

   The esteemed words of the ancient Buddha did not arrive together.

   One doesn't know who is let loose to scatter dust and sand.


   


                           42.  Layman Pang's Snow


    Raised:


                  Layman Pang bid adieu to Yaoshan.  Shan ordered ten
   people who were Zen travelers to go together to the main gate to see
   him off.  The Layman pointed to the snow in the middle of the sky and
   said, "The excellent snow; flake by flake it does not fall at another
   spot."

                  At that time there was Zen traveler Quan who asked, "At
   what spot does it fall?"

                  The gentleman hit once with a slap.

                  Quan said, "A Layman too cannot get careless."

                  The gentleman said, "Like this you call yourself a Zen
   traveler. Lao-tzu has not liberated your dependence."

                  Quan said, "Layman how do you make it alive?"

                  The gentleman again hit once with a slap and said,  "The
   eye sees like a blind person; the mouth speaks like a mute."

                  Xuedou separately said, "At the first questioning point,
   yet grab a snowball then hit."


   Xuedou's own ode, placing another hit, says:

   A trap.

   Hit with a snowball, hit with a snowball.

   The checkpoint of Elder Pang's function is unable to be grasped.

   The superior person of Heaven does not personally know of the opening.

   Inside of the eye, inside of the ear, decidedly easy-going.

   Easy-going decidedly.

   The blue-eyed barbarian monk is unable to differentiate.


   


                         43 Dongshan's Cold and Heat


   Raised:


                  A monk asked  Dongshan. "So, how avoid the coming of the
   winter cold and summer heat?"

                  Shan said. "Why not turn to the place without cold and
   heat?"

                  The monk said, "So, what is the place without cold and
   heat?"

                  Shan said, "In the cold time, the cold kills the
   preceptor; in the burning time, the burning kills the preceptor."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   Hanging down a hand is also identical to a 10,000 fathom precipice,

   The Fair and the Biased, why must they be in a plan?

   The ancient crystal palace reflects the brilliant moon.

   The patient and capable Black [Hound] of Han  vainly ascends
   the steps.

   Black.


   


                          44 Heshan Beats the Drum


   Raised:


   Heshan handed down words saying, "Rote study is to hear of the
   meaning.  Exhaustive study is near to the meaning.  To cross over these
   two things is indeed genuine crossing over."

   A monk came out and asked, "So, what is genuine crossing over?"

   Shan said, "Being free to beat the drum."

   He again asked, "So, what is genuine truth?"

   Shan said, "Being free to beat the drum."

   He again asked, "As it is heart-mind and as it is Buddha, as it is I do
   not question. So, what is neither heart-mind nor Buddha?"

   Shan said, "Being free to beat the drum."

   He again asked, "Turning to the arrival of the superior person, at that
   time, so, what is received?"

   Shan said, "Being free to beat the drum."


   


                        45. Zhaozhou's Cotton Jacket


   Raised:


   A monk asked Zhaozhou, "The 10,000 things return (as their origin
   point) to the one. To what place does the one return?"

   Zhou said, "I was at Qing Province and made one piece of clothing: a
   cotton jacket weighing 7 pounds."


   


                          46. Jingqing's Rain Drops


    Raised:


               Jingqing asked a monk, "What is the sound outside the
   door?"

               The monk said, "The sound of rain drops."

               Qing said, "The multitude of beings are topsy-turvey,
   confused by the self to chase objects."

               The monk said, "Venerable how do you make it alive?"

               Qing said, "Soaked is not confused by the self."

               The monk said, "So what is the intended meaning of 'Soaked
   is not confused by the self'?"

               Qing said, "To exit the living-body may yet be easy; to
   speak of the peeled-off entity-body ought to be difficult. Soaked."



   


                         47. Yunmen's Not Harvested


    Raised:


                  A monk asked Yunmen, "So what is the Dharmakaya?"

                  Men said, "The six are not harvested."


   


                         48.  Frying Tea at Zhaoqing


    Raised:


                  Great Superintendent Wang entered Zhaoqing (lit.
   Incur-blessings) as tea was frying. At the time Upper-seat Lang was
   together with Mingzhao and held the long-handle pan.  Lang flipped over
   the long-handle pan and expelled the tea.

                  The Great Superintendent saw and asked the Upper-seat,
   “What is under the tea stove?”

                  Lang said, “The spirit being holds up the stove in both
   hands.”

                  The Great Superintendent said, “Since the spirit being
   is already holding up the stove in both hands, why did you flip over
   the long-handle pan and expel the tea?”

                  Lang said, “A government official of 1000 days loses in
   one morning.”

                  The Great Superintendent shook his sleeves then exited.

                  Mingzhao said, “Upper-seat Lang, you have yet eaten
   Zhaoqing’s cooked rice, yet you go to the other side of the river to
   strike wild charcoal .”

                  Lang said, “Venerable, how do you make it alive?”

                  Zhao said, “The non-human gained it’s advantage.”

                  Xuedou said, “At that time however, one should have
   stepped on and toppled the tea stove.”


   


                     49.  Sansheng's Golden Fish Scales


   Raised:


                  Sansheng asked Xuefeng, "[If] the golden fish scales
   that pass through the net are not investigated, [then] what is used for
   food?"

                  Feng said, "Wait until you come out of the net, then
   [I'll] speak to you."

                  Sheng said, "A Learned and Virtuous One of fifteen
   hundred people and [you] still don't know the 'head of the word'
   (huatou).  "

                  Feng said, "[I'm] an old monk in residence managing
   numerous affairs."


   


                        50. Yunmen's Bowl and Bucket


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Yunmen, "So what is the samadhi of all the
   dusts?"

                  Men said, "Cooked rice in the bowl, water in the
   bucket."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   Cooked rice in the bowl; water in the bucket.

   With many mouths playing up to the teacher, it is difficult to let down
   a beak.

   The positions of the Northern Bushel  and the Southern Star
   are not special.

   The white billows flood the Sky, the flat Earth rises up.

   Intending does not intend.

   Stopping does not stop.

   Each and every one is without pants, the children of those who excel.


   


                             51 Xuefeng's What?


   Raised:


   At the time that Xuefeng was dwelling at a hermitage, there was a pair
   of monks who came to pay the customary respects.  Feng saw them come
   and used a hand to support himself on the hermitage door.  Letting go,
   he personally came forward and said, “Is what?”

   The monks likewise said, “Is what?”

   Feng hung his head and returned to the hermitage.


   The monks later went to Yantou.  Tou asked, “From what place have you
   come?”

   The monks said, “We’ve come from south of the mountain range (alt. the
   southern mountain range).”

   Tou said, “You monks went to Xuefeng?”

   The monks said, “We monks went.”

   Tou said, “What did you have for words and phrases?

   The monks raised the preceding discussion.

   Tou said, “What did he say?”

   The monks said, “He was speechless. He hung his head and returned to
   the hermitage.”

   Tou said, “Too bad.  I regard this as my doing in the first place. I
   regret not saying to him the final after phrase.  If I had said it to
   him, how the people under heaven could not deal with Old Xue.”


   When the end of summer arrived, the monks repeated the words they had
   raised before and begged for augmentation.

   Tou said, “Why didn’t you ask beforehand?”

   The monks said, “We had not the confidence to permit it easily.”

   Tou said, “Even though Xuefeng and I are born in the same line, he and
   I do not die in the same line.  One should know the final phrase
   afterwards, only this is.”


   


                        52  Zhaozhou’s Stone Bridge


   Raised:


   A Monk asked Zhaozhou, “For a long time, [I’ve heard] the report of
   Zhaozhou’s stone elevated-bridge. [I’ve] arrived only to see a rough
   bridge. ”

   Zhou said, “You only see the rough bridge. For the time being you do
   not see the stone elevated-bridge.”

   The monk said, “So what is the stone elevated-bridge?”

   Zhou said, “It ferries across donkeys; it ferries across horses, the
   bridge.”


   


                        53 Great Master Twists a Nose


   Raised:


                  Great Master Ma and Baizhang were walking to a rest
   stop.  Seeing young wild ducks passing in flight, Great Master said,
   “What’s that?”

                  Zhang said, “Young wild ducks.”

                  Great Master said, “To what place are they going away?”

                  Zhang said, “They passed in flight and are gone away.”

                  Great Master proceeded to twist the tip of Baizhang’s
   nose.

                  Zhang did suffer the pain and cried out.

                  Great Master said, “ How have they already flown and
   gone away?”


   


                          54 Yunmen’s Both Hands


   Raised:


                  Yunmen asked a monk, “What place did you leave nearby?"

                  The monk said, “Xichan.”

                  Men said, “What words and phrases does Xichan have
   recently?”

                  The monk stretched out both hands

                  Men hit with one slap.

                  The monk said, “I’m beginning to speak.”

                  However, Men stretched out both hands.

                  The monk was speechless.

                  Then Men hit.


   


                           55  Daowu Doesn’t Say


    Raised:


   Daowu and Jianyuan arived to share condolences with one family.

   Yuan patted the coffin and said, “Is alive the mistaken view or dead
   the mistaken view?”

   Wu said “Either alive don’t say, or dead don’t say.”

   Yuan said, “Why don’t say?”

   Wu said, “Don’t say, don’t say.”


   On the road in the middle of the return trip, Yuan said, “Venerable, be
   straightforward with me and begin to say. If Wu doesn’t say, then I’ll
   hit the venerable and go away too.

   Wu said, “If you hit, of course I’ll allow the hit. To say, of course,
   don’t say.”

   Yuan then hit.


   Later Daowu moved into transformation (i.e., he died).   Yuan went to
   Shishuang and brought up the previous conversation.  Shuang said,
   “Either alive don’t say, or dead don’t say.”

   Yuan said, “Why don’t say?”

   Shuang said, “Don’t say. Don’t say.”

   As these words fell, Yuan had insight.


   One day, Yuan went up to the dharma hall with a shovel. and from the
   east [he] went across to the west, and from the west [he] went across
   to the east.

   Shuang said, “Wat are you doing?”

   Yuan said, “[I’m] seeking [our] prior master’s spirit-bone relics.

   Shuang said, “Flooding waves vast and unbounded, the white billows
   overflow the sky—[you’re] seeking what spirit-bone relics of [our]
   prior master?”

   Xuedou’s attached words said, “Blue skies, blue skies.”

   Yuan said, “A just right show of power”

   Tai Yuan Fu said, “It seems the prior master’s spirit-bone relics are
   present.”


   


                         56 Qinshan Shoots an Arrow


   Raised:


   Zen traveler Liang asked Qinshan, “So what about the time when one
   arrowhead destroys three checkpoints?”

   Shan said, “To see it, liberate and produce the host within the
   checkpoints.”

   Liang said, “Knowing in this way, then to pass across one must
   transform.”

   Shan said, “What time is there for further waiting?”

   Liang said, “A well released arrow does not show the place it is at.”
   Then he exited.

   Shan said, “For the time being, come on instructor (acarya).”

   Liang turned back his head.

   Shan held and stopped him and said, “As it is for the time being, cease
   with the ’One arrowhead destroys three checkpoints.’  Test it with
   Qinshan (i.e., me): shoot an arrow and see.”

   While Liang was deciding what to discuss, Shan hit seven times with a
   stick and said, “We’ll wait for 30 years further with this fellow’s
   doubt.”


   


                       57  Zhaozhou Alone and Honored


   Raised:


   A monk asked Zhaozhou, “’The Far-reaching Way is without difficulty,
   only rejecting picking and choosing’ So what doesn’t pick and choose?”

   Zhou said, “’Above the heavens, below the heavens, only I, alone and
   honored.’”

   The monk said, “This is tantamount to picking and choosing.”

   Zhou said, “You field-and-village slave, where is picking and
   choosing?”

   The monk was speechless.

   [Xuedou’s attached word said] “Village(r).”


   


                    58 Zhaozhou’s Slice of Carelessness


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Zhaozhou, “’The Far-reaching Way is without
   difficulty, only rejecting picking and choosing.’  For people of these
   times, is this a hackneyed phrase run into the ground or not?

   Zhao said, “I previously had a person ask me, and frankly I gained five
   years and a slice of carelessness did not befall.”


   


                        59 Zhaozhou Quotes To the End


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Zhaozhou, “’The Far-reaching Way is without
   difficulty, only rejecting picking and choosing.’ ‘Just when there is
   language there is picking and choosing.’ So what is used for people,
   Venerable?”

   Zhou said “Why don’t you quote these words to the end?”

   The monk said, “I only recall up to this part.”

   Zhou said, “Only this, ‘The Far-reaching Way is without difficulty,
   only rejecting picking and choosing.’”


   


                             60 Yunmen’s Staff


   Raised:


                  Yunmen used the staff to instruct the assembly and said,
   “The staff changes and becomes a dragon. However, it swallows Heaven
   and Earth completely! Mountains, rivers, and the great earth—from where
   are they able to come?”


   


                            61 Fengxue's One Dust


   Raised:


                  Fengxue handed down words saying, “If the one dust is
   established the home country prospers.  If the one dust is not
   established, the home country is mournfully lost.”

                  Xuedou picked up the staff and said, “Still, patch-robed
   monks do you have the same birth and the same death?”


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   The people in ancient accord with the teaching do not unfurrow the
   eyebrows

   They just plan on the home country establishing a strong foundation.

   Scheming ministers and fierce generals, now where are they?

   For ten thousand miles the clear wind and only oneself knows.


   


                          62. Yunmen's One Treasure


    Raised:


                  Yunmen taught the assembly saying,

                  "'Inside of Heaven and Earth,

                  In the interstices of the universe,

                  Within there exists one treasure

                  Hidden in Form Mountain.'

                  Pick up the lantern and face towards the inner Buddha
   Hall, the triple gate will come on the top of the lantern."


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   Look, look,

   On the ancient shore, what person holds the fishing pole?

   Clouds gradually, gradually.

   Waters endlessly, endlessly.

   The reed flowers in the moonlight, you see by yourself.


   


                          63.  Nanquan Chops a Cat


   Raised:


                  At Nanquan’s one day the east and west couple of halls
   were quarreling about a kitten.  Nanquan saw and proceeded to hold it
   up and said, “Be able to say it quickly and I won’t chop.”

                  The assembly was without a response. Quan chopped the
   kitten into a couple of sections.


   


                           64.  Zhaozhou's Sandals


   Raised:


                  Nanquan again raised the previous discussion to ask
   Zhaozhou. Zhou then took off his sandals to wear them on top of his
   head and went out.

                  Nanquan said, “Sir, if you were there, you’d exactly be
   able to save the kitten.”


   


                  65. One Outside the Way Questions Buddha


   Raised:


                  One outside the Way questioned Buddha, “I do not
   question with words; I do not question without words.”

                  The World Honored One was respectful a long time.

                  The one outside the Way said in praise, “The World
   Honored One’s great compassion and great pity have opened my clouds of
   confusion and allowed me to gain entry.”

                  After the one outside the Way departed, Ananda
   questioned Buddha, “What did the one outside the Way have in the place
   of evidence and accordingly the words ‘gaining entry’?”

                  Buddha said, “Like a fine horse of the world, he sees
   the shadow of the whip and goes accordingly.”


   


                        66. Yantou Retrieves a Sword


   Raised:


                  Yantou asked a monk, “What place did you come from?”

                  The monk said, “I came from the Western capital.”

                  Tou said, “After Huangchao (Yellow-nest) passed away and
   returned to his origin place, were you able to retrieve his sword?”

                  The monk said, “I was able to retrieve it.”

                  Yantou pulled out his neck close in front and said,
   “[囗@力]”

                  The monk said, “The master’s head has fallen!”

                  Yantou guffawed and guffawed great laughter.

                  The monk later arrived at  Xuefeng’s.

           Feng said, “What place did you come from?”

                  The monk said, “I came from Yantou.”

                  Feng said, “What words and phrases did he have?”

                  The monk raised the previous discussion.

                  Xuefeng hit 30 blows with the stick and chased him away.


   


                    67. The Mahasattva Expounds the Sutra


   Raised:


                  Emperor Liang Wu requested Mahasattva Fu to expound the
   Diamond Sutra. The Mahasattva then from the high seat, lifted and
   brought the lectern table down once, and then came down from the seat.
   Emperor Wu was dumbfounded.

                  The Official of the Records asked, “Does Your Highness
   understand yet?”

                  The Emperor said, “I don’t understand.”

                  The Official of the Records said, “The Mahasattva has
   finished expounding the sutra.”


   


                        68. Yangshan Questions a Name


   Raised:


                  Yangshan asked Sansheng, “What is your name?”

                  Sheng said, “Huiji.”

                  Yangshan said, “Huiji is me.”

                  Sheng said, “My name is Huiran.”

                  Yangshan gufawed great laughter.


   [Comments: Yangshan (revered-mountain) Huiji (kind/gracious-silence)

   Sansheng (lit. triple holiness) Huiran (kind/gracious-thus)


   


                         69. Nanquan Draws a Circle


   Raised:


                  Nanquan, Guizong, and Magu together went to do customary
   respects to National Teacher Zhong.  Stopping half way, Nanquan drew
   the image of one circle on top of the dirt and said, “If you’re able to
   say then we’ll leave.”

                  Guizong sat in the middle of the circle image.  Magu
   then did the bow of a woman.

                  Quan said, “Is it like this?  The standard is not to
   leave!”

                  Guizong said, “What is going in your mind?”


   


                   70 Guishan’s “I Withdraw and Beg”


   Raised:


                  Guishan (J. Isan), Wufeng (J. Gohô) , and Yunyan (J.
   Ungan) stood together as attendants for Baizhang.  Baizhang asked
   Guishan, “If side by side you withdraw throat and lips, how do you
   speak to make it alive?”

                  Guishan said, “I withdraw and beg the Venerable to
   speak.”

                  Zhang said, “I don’t decline to turn to you and speak,
   but I fear then that afterwards I would lose my children and
   grandchildren for descendants.”


   Therefore [Xuedou's] ode says:


   “I withdraw and beg the Venerable to speak.”

   The tiger’s head gives birth to horns coming out from the wild grasses.

   In the ten island-continents, spring is ended and flowers are withered.

   In the forest of coral trees, the sun is brilliantly bright.


   


                     71 Wufeng’s “You Too Should”


   Raised:


                  Baizhang again asked Wufeng (J. Goho), “If, side by
   side, you withdraw throat and lips, how do you speak to make it alive?”

                  Feng said, “Venerable (Osho) you too should withdraw
   them side by side.”

                  Zhang said, “In the place without a person, I put my
   hand to forehead and gaze into the distance for you.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   


                      72 Yunyan’s “Have or Not?”


   Raised:


                  Baizhang again asked Yunyan (J. Ungan), “If side by side
   you withdraw throat and lips, how do you speak to make it alive?”

                  Yan said, “Does the Venerable have or not?”

                  Zhang said, “I have lost my children and grandchildren.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   


                       73 Master Ma's White and Black


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


                  For someone who is a master explaining the Dharma, there
   is no explaining and there is no pointing.  For someone who is one
   listening to the Dharma, there is no hearing and there is no
   attaining.   Explaining is already without explaining and without
   pointing;

   to strive thus is not explaining.  Listening is already without hearing
   and without attaining; to strive thus is not listening.   Accordingly,
   those without explaining and without listening, however are relatively
   few.  Just so, now you various people listening to this mountain monk
   with an explanation of that other side, how do you make it alive to
   avoid attaining these mistakes?  For those who possess the eye to pass
   through the checkpoints, a test is raised to examine it:


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Grand Master Ma (Mazu, J. Baso),
   “Abandoning the four phrases and renouncing the 100 negations, I beg
   Master to directly point to the meaning of that First Certain Someone’s
   coming from the West.”

                  Master Ma said, “Today, I toiled and am weary and do not
   have the energy to explain it for you.  Take the question to Zhizang,
   (J. Chizo) and go away.”

                  The monk asked Zhizang.   Zang said, “Why don’t you ask
   the Venerable?”

                  The monk said, “The Venerable instructed me to come and
   ask.”

                  Zang said, “Today my head aches, and I don’t have the
   energy to explain it for you. Take the question to Elder Brother Hai
   and go away.

                  The monk asked Elder Brother Hai (J. Kai).

                  Hai said, “I arrived at this side, but still I don’t
   understand.”

                  The monk raised it to show to Grand Master Ma.

                  Master Ma said, “Zang’s head is white; Hai’s head is
   black.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   “Zang’s head is white; Hai’s head is black.”

   Clear-eyed patchrobed monks understand they don’t attain it.

   The horse colt trampled and killed the people under heaven

   Linji is not yet a thief snatching in the white.

   “Abandoning the four phrases and renouncing the 100 negations”,

   Between heaven above and the people, only I know.


   


                     74 Jinniu’s Bucket of Cooked Rice


   Raised:


                  Venerable Jinniu (Golden Ox), when every meal time
   arrived, by himself in the front of the monk’s hall with the bucket of
   cooked rice did a dance and, with guffaws of great laughter, said, “Mr.
   Bodhisattvas, come and eat the cooked rice.”


                  Xuedou said, “Although [he acted] in this way, Jinniu
   was not being good hearted.”


                  A monk asked Changqing, “The man of old said, ‘Mr.
   Bodhisattvas, come and eat the cooked rice.’ So what was his intended
   aim?”

                  Qing said, “A great show causing celebration and praise
   of the meal.”


   Xuedou’s ode says:


                  Guffaws of laughter underneath the shadow of the white
   cloud,

                  Holding on with both hands, he came handing it down and
   giving it to them.

                  If [they] are children of the golden-haired lion,

                  [They would] see the boastful swindle from three
   thousand li away.


   


                          75 Wujiu’s Unjust Stick


   Raised:


                  A monk who was a follower of the assembly of Venerable
   Dingzhou’s side [fn 75] came and arrived at Wujiu.

                  Wujiu asked, “How does the Way of the Dharma of Dingzhou
   resemble this side?”

                  The monk said, “[It is] not different.”

         Jiu said, “If not different then you should turn back to the
   other center and go.” Then he hit.

                  The monk said, “The tip of the stick has eyes. Don’t get
   careless hitting a person.”

                  Jiu said, “Today I hit at one in particular!”  Then he
   hit down thrice.

                  The monk then left.

                  Jiu said, “An unjust stick, from the first arrival there
   is a person enduring it.”

                  The monk turned his body around and said, “How can one
   quarrel when the handle is in the Venerable’s palm?”

                  Jiu said. “If you want it, this mountain monk will turn
   it around to give it to you.”

                  The monk went close in front and grabbed the stick from
   Jiu’s palm and hit down on Jiu thrice.

                  Jiu said, “An unjust stick, an unjust stick.”

                  The monk said, “There is a person enduring it”

                  Jiu said, “I carelessly hit at this particular fellow.”

                  The monk then did a ritual bow.

                  Jiu said, “A Venerable, but goes on like this!”

                  The monk laughed greatly and
   exited
                  Jiu said, “Alleviating can be like this. Alleviating can
   be like this.”


   


                          76 Danxia Possesses Eyes


   Raised:


                  Danxia asked a monk, “From what place have you come?”

                  The monk said, “I come from down the mountain.”

                  Xia said, “Have you finished eating the cooked rice or
   not?”

                  The monk said, “I’ve finished eating the cooked rice.”

                  Xia said, “Did the person at the bottom who came with
   the cooked rice to give to you to eat also possess eyes?"

                  The monk was speechless.


                  Changqing asked Baofu, “As the person, who gives the
   cooked rice to eat, announces the benevolence of having a share, how
   does [that one] not possess eyes?”

                  Fu said, “The one who gives and the one who receives are
   both two blind fellows.”

                  Changqing said “Having come to use up all their
   opportunities, they still become blind don’t they?”

                  Fu said, “Are you saying we’re getting blind?”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   Using up the opportunities is not becoming blind.

   By laying a hand on the ox’s head to eat the grass,

   All of the 28 and the six founding masters,

   Came to uphold the precious vessel and complete fording across errors.

   Fording across the depths of errors,

   There is no place to seek.

   Heaven (Devas) above and people are in the same in between space
   sinking on the shore.

   A workshop.

   A wink.


   


                          77 Yunmen's Porridge Cake


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Yunmen, “So what about the discussion of
   ‘leaping over Buddha and stepping over the founders?’”

                  Men said, “Porridge cake.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   In discussions of “leaping over,” the questions of Zen travelers are
   one-sided and many.

   Do you also see that a seam splits and spreads open to separate?

   He came to be stuffed with rice porridge cake yet did not dwell on it.

   Until now, under heaven there was a boastful swindle.

   Stuffed.


   


                       78 Bodhisattvas Enter the Bath


   Raised:


                  In ancient times there were 16 bodhisattvas. At the time
   for monks to bathe they followed the custom and entered the bath, and
   suddenly awoke by the primary cause of water.

                  All you Virtuous Ones of Zen, how do you make it alive
   to comprehend them saying, “The wonderful touch proclaims the
   brilliance and becomes the abode of the Buddha’s children.”

                  Also, [you] must do eight holes in seven borings to
   begin to get it.


   Xuedou's ode says:


   


                          79 Touzi’s Correct Hits


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Touzi, “Every sound is Buddha’s sound.
   Correct or not?”

                  Touzi said, “Correct.”

                  The monk said, “[Then] Venerable, aren’t [your] farts
   the chirping sound of the Buddha’s bowl?”

                  Touzi then hit.

                  He again asked, “Coarse words and fine speech all return
   to the primary meaning.  Correct or not?”

                  Touzi said, “Correct.”

                  The monk said, “May I call the Venerable to be taken for
   one donkey?”

                  Touzi then hit.


                  [Xuedou added] “Fart.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   


                        80 Zhaoshou’s Rushing Water


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Zhaozhou, “When first born, does the infant
   also possess the sixth consciousness or not?

                  Zhaozhou said, “A ball strikes the surface of the
   rushing water.”


                  The monk, in repeating this, asked Touzi, “So what was
   the meaning and purpose of ’A ball strikes the surface of the rushing
   water.’”

                  Zi said, “Moment by moment, unceasing flowing.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   


                        81 Yaoshan Observes an Arrow


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Yaoshan (Medicine Mountain), “In a level
   field of shallow grass a great stag and the deer became a
   herd.  So how is one able to shoot and get the great stag
   among the great stags?”

                  Shan said, “Look... an arrow.”

                  The monk lay down his body then rolled over.

                  Shan said, “Attendant, drag out this dead fellow.”

                  The monk then departed swiftly.

                  Shan said, “What limit is there for this fellow’s
   playing with mud balls?”


           Xuedou picked it up and said, “Although in three steps he
   lived, in five steps he had to die gaping at the great stag.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   


                      82 Dalong’s Brocade and Indigo


   Raised:


                  A monk ask Dalong (Great Dragon), “The color-body
   (rupakaya) falls to ruin. So what is the firm and stable Dharmabody?”

                  Long said,              “The mountain flowers open,
   resembling brocade

                                                 The valley river deep,
   like indigo.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   


                           83 Yunmen's Bare Pillar


   Raised:


                  Yunmen instructed the assembly and said, “The Old
   Buddhas and the bare pillar unite with each other.  What degree of
   subtle activity is it?”

                  Substituting himself, he said, “Clouds rise up on South
   Mountain. Rain falls on North Mountain.”


   Xuedou's ode says:



   


                  84  The Vimalakirti Sutra’s Non-Duality


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


   Just say, does this person also possess eye(s) or not?  If you are able
   to judge this person, then I approve that you have come to personally
   see the people of old.


   Raised:


                  Vimalakirti asked Manjusri, “How do those ranked as
   being bodhisattvas enter the Dharma gate of non-duality?”

                  Manju(sri) said, “So this is my idea, in everything, to
   be without words, without explaining, without showing, and without
   knowledge and to leave aside all questions and answers, is the act of
   entering the Dharma gate of non-duality.”

                  Thereat, Manjusri asked Vimalakirti, “Each and every one
   of those equally ranked and myself have explained already. You who are
   virtuous and equally ranked explain, how do those ranked as being
   bodhisattvas enter the Dharma gate of non-duality?”


                  Xuedou said, “What did Vimala(kirti) say?”

                  Repeating he said, “Investigate and expose completely!”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   


                 85 The Hermitage Master’s Tiger’s Roar


   Raised:


                  A monk arrived at the place of the hermitage master of
   Paulownia (Empress Tree) Peak and immediately asked, “Here inside, if
   you suddenly run into a tiger, again how would you make it alive?”

                  The Hermitage Master immediately made a tiger’s roar.

                  The monk immediately made gestures of fear.

                  The Hermitage Master burst out great laughter.

                  The monk said, “This old thief.”

                  The Hermitage Master said, “How this old monk endures
   contention.”

                  The monk gave up and left.


           Xuedou said, “Indeed, by the standard both are each wicked
   thieves, only free to steal the hand bell by covering their ears.”


   


                     86  Yunmen’s Brightness of Light


   Raised:


                  Yunmen said in handing down words, “In every last person
   there is the brightness of light. When looking, it is unseen endless
   darkness.  How do you make it live, this brightness of light of all
   people?”

                  Substituting for himself, he said, “The kitchen
   storehouse, the triple gate.”

                  Again he said, “Good things are not as good as nothing.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   Shining by itself, the solitary brightness lines up

   And flows unobstructed a single thread for you.

   The flowers wither; the tree is without a shadow.

   When looking, who does not see?

   Seeing is not seeing.

   Backwards astride the ox, ahh!, to enter the Buddha sanctuary.


   


                     87 Yunmen’s Medicine and Disease


   Raised:


                  Yunmen said in teaching the assembly, “’Medicine and
   disease cure each other.’  The entire great earth is medicine. What
   particularly is oneself?

                  “Cure.”


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   “The entire great Earth is Medicine.”

   From ancient times to the present, how extremely wrong!

   Don’t make the cart behind closed doors.

   The path through is naturally desolate and empty.

   Wrong. Wrong.

   Yet, nostrils as far as heaven are also pierced.


   


                        88 Xuansha’s Three Maladies


   Raised:


                  Xuansha, instructing the assembly, said, “In all
   directions the sojourning-elders welcomed situations to aide the living
   in the path leading to the destruction of suffering.  If you
   unexpectedly come to run into people with three kinds of maladies, how
   do you make it alive to welcome them?  With those who suffer from being
   blind, if you pick up the mallet or stand up the whisk, the other, too,
   does not see.  With those who suffer from being deaf, about the samadhi
   of language, the other, too, does not hear. With those who suffer from
   being mute, if you instruct them to speak, again they are not able to
   speak.  Just how do you make it alive to welcome them?   If you’re not
   able to welcome these people the Buddha Dharma is without verifiable
   effect.”


                  A monk requested augmentation from Yunmen. Yunmen said,
   “Set forth your ceremonial-respects.”

                  The monk did the ceremonial obeisance and rose.  Yunmen
   used the staff to stab.  The monk withdrew backwards.

                  Men said, “Indeed, you do not suffer from being blind.”

                  Again he called him to come near in front.  The monk
   neared in front.

                  Men said, “Indeed, you do not suffer from being deaf.”

                  Men thereupon said. “Reply, what do you understand?”

                  The monk said, “I do not understand.”

                  Men said, “Indeed, you do not suffer from being mute.”

                  The monk had introspection into this.

                  Stare.

                  Yawn.

                  Stab.


   


                        89 Yunyan's Great Compassion


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


                  Flowing throughout the body are eyes, yet seeing does
   not arrive at it.  Flowing throughout the body are ears, yet hearing
   does not attain it.  Flowing throughout the body are mouths yet
   speaking does not manifest it.  Flowing throughout the body is the
   heart-mind, yet reflecting does not produce it.

                  Were “flowing throughout the body” to immediately just
   stop, and suddenly, if you are without eyes, how do you make seeing
   alive; without ears, how do you make hearing alive; without a mouth,
   how do you make speaking alive; without the heart-mind, how do you make
   reflecting alive?

                  If you face toward the particular inner side and are
   able to unfold a single thread of the Way, then you are together with
   the ancient Buddhas sharing the meeting.  Were meeting the standards
   (i.e., the koans) to just stop, just say, particularly what person
   would you meet?


   Raised:


                  Yunyan asked Daowu, “How does the Bodhisattva of Great
   Compassion expect to make use of the many hands and eyes?

                  Wu said, “It is like a person in the middle of the night
   whose hands feel back for the pillow.”

                  Yan said, “I understand.”

                  Wu said, “How do you make your understanding alive?”

                  Yan said, “All over the body are hands and eyes.”

           Wu said, “You said the greatest part of it, but are only able
   to say eight-tenths.”

                  Yan said, “Senior Teacher, how do you make it alive?”

                  Wu said, “Flowing throughout the body are hands and
   eyes.”


   [Xuedou's] ode says:


   All over the body, yes.

   Flowing throughout the body, yes.

   Picking it up, though, is still one hundred thousand li [away].

   Spreading out and extending [it’s wings], the roc mounts the clouds of
   the six unions

   To strike the wind drum and clarify the waters of the four oceans.

   Indeed, oh, what fine dust suddenly comes into being?

   Oh, what piece of thin hair has not yet stopped?

   You don’t see,

   The pearls in the net hang down in patterns, the reflections repeating
   and repeating,

   The hands and eyes in the head of the stick accord with what rises up.

   Bah!


   


                     90 Zhimen’s Essence and Function


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


                  “The single phrase before a sound” is not transmitted by
   1,000 sages.  “The single thread before the face” endures without an
   interval.  All naked and clean, all washed and red, the coiffure on the
   head loosened, and the ears erect on the new moon day.  Just say, how
   do you make it alive? A test is raised for examination:


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Zhimen, “So what is the essence of prajna?”

                  Men said, “The oyster holds in its mouth the bright
   moon.”

                  The monk said, “So what is the function of prajna?”

                  Men said, “The rabbit’s offspring are held in the womb.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   One piece of congealed emptiness cuts off names and feelings.

   Humans and Devas in accord with this see the being of
   emptiness.

   The deepest meanings of the oyster’s holding in its mouth and the dark
   rabbit

   Have been given to the family of Zen to make war.


   


                           91 Yanguan's Rhinoceros


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


                  Leap over emotions; separate from views; leave bonds;
   and loosen the stuck. Indeed, rise up facing the vehicle of the supreme
   lineage. Aid and abet the treasury of the correct Dharma eye.   Also in
   the ten directions you must uniformly respond with the exquisiteness of
   the eight facets.  In this way you directly arrive at the cropland.
   Just say, in giving back is there the foundation of the same
   attainment, the same testimony, the same death and the same birth?  A
   test is raised to examine it:


   Raised:


                  Yanguan one day called the attendant, “Give me the
   rhinoceros fan.”

                  The attendant said, “The fan is broken!”

                  Guan said, “Since the fan is broken, give back to me the
   rhinoceros calf.”

                  The attendant had no reply.


                  Touzi said, “I don’t refuse to produce it; I’m fearful
   the horn on the head is incomplete.”

                  Xuedou picked it up and said, “I want the incomplete
   horn on the head.”

                  Shishuang said. “If it is returned to the venerable,
   then there is nothing!”

                  Xuedou picked it up and said, “The rhinoceros calf is
   still present.”

                  Zifu drew the appearance of a single circle and in the
   center drew the single character for “ox”.

                  Xuedou picked it up and said, “In coming and going, what
   are you going to produce?”

                  Baofu said, “The venerable’s age is respected; better to
   ask a different person.”

                  Xuedou picked it up and said, “Pitiable, to toil yet be
   without merit.”


   Xuedou’s ode in one thread says:


   Beating.

   The rhinoceros fan has been in use for many ages.

   The question manifests from the beginning and in general one does not
   know.

   The unrestricted clear wind and the horn on the head,

   To the same end, when they leave, the clouds and rain are difficult to
   pursue.


                  Xuedou again said, “If you want the clear wind to return
   and the horn on the head re-grow, then I ask each of you zen guests to
   let down a single turning word on the stated question, ‘Since the fan
   is broken. give back  to me the rhinoceros calf.’”

                  At that time there was a monk who came forth and said,
   “Great multitude, leave the meeting hall.”

                  Xuedou called out and said, “I cast the hook fishing for
   Kun (a giant fish of legend), and in fishing got this single frog.”  He
   then descended from the seat.


   


                  92 The World Honored One Ascends The Seat


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


   The stirring lute strings of a different melody are difficult to meet
   in 1,000 years.  To see the rabbit and release the hawk and at once to
   take hold of the excellent; to sum up all language to become a single
   phrase; to gather up [as many] realms as the sands of the Great
   Chiliocosm to become a single dust mote; to die the same and be born
   the same; [to get] eight holes by drilling seven [times]; still, is
   there one who can confirm accordingly?   A test is raised to examine
   it.


   Raised:


                  One Day the World Honored One ascended the seat.

                  Manjusri, to be clear, struck and said, “Carefully
   observe the Dharma of the King of Dharma. The Dharma of the King of
   Dharma is thus.”

                  The World Honored One then descended the seat.


   Xuedou's ode arises:


   Those who are established among the ranks of sages crowded together
   know

   The decree of the Dharma of the King of Dharma is not like this.

   If there was a guest from Sindh among the assembled,

   Why was it necessary for Manjusri to strike down once?


   


                         Case 93 Daguang Did A Dance


   [no pointer to this case]


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Daguang, “Changqing state, ‘to cause
   celebration and praise of the meal.’  So what was the
   intended purpose?”

                  Daguang did a dance.

                  The monk offered obeisance.
                  Guang said, “What do you see particularly to then offer
   obeisance?”

                  The monk did a dance.

           Guang said, “This wild fox spirit.”


   Xuedou's ode says:


   The preceding arrow was still slight, the later arrow was deep.

   Who says the leaves are yellow or gold?

   Like an imitation of the billowing waves of Caoxi,

   Limitless average people blanket the shore to sink.


   

                       94  The Surangama's Not Seeing


   Raised:


                  The Śūraṅgama Sūtra says, “When I do not see, why don’t
   [you] see the locus of my not seeing?  If [you] see the not
   seeing, intrinsically that is not the characteristic of not seeing.  If
   [you] don’t see the ground of my not seeing, intrinsically [it] is not
   an object, why say [it] is not you?”


   [Xuedou's ode says]:


   The whole elephant and the whole ox – are not different from cataracts.

   Those who act in accord with what comes share the names and patterns.

   So now wanting to see the yellow-headed elder ,

   Every grain of dust of every realm is half the way


   


                             95 Baofu Drinks Tea


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


                  Where there is a Buddha do not get there and stop; to
   stop manifests a life of horns on the head.  Where there is no Buddha,
   quickly run by; if you do not run by, the grass is ten feet deep.  If
   you are abundantly upright, all naked and clean, all washed and red,
   with external affairs being without machinations, and the external
   being without affairs, you do not escape sticking by the stump waiting
   for a rabbit.

                  Just say, altogether, is treading the living walk not
   like this or is it like this?  A test is raised for examination:


   Raised:


                  There was a time Changqing said, “I would rather there
   be talk about arhats having the three poisons; don’t talk about the
   Tathagata having two kinds of language. I don’t say the Tathagata is
   without language, only is without two types of language.”

                  Baofu said, “How do you make it alive to be the
   Tathagata’s language?”

                  Qing said “A deaf person struggles to be able to hear.”

                  Baofu said, “I know for sure you are facing towards the
   Way of the second head.”

                  Qing said, “How do you make it alive to be the
   Tathagata’s language?”

                  Baofu said, “Go drink tea.”


   [Xuedou's] Ode says:


   Oh, the heads! First. Second.

   A resting dragon does not reflect on the still water.

   Having the moon without a place, the waves settle.

   Having a place, the billows rise up without a wind.

   Zen traveler Leng, Zen traveler Leng!

   In the third month at the Dragon Gate of Yu, he incurred a spot on the
   forehead.


   


                       96   Zhaozhou’s Turning Words


   [No pointer to this case.]


   Raised:


                  Zhaozhou taught the multitude with three turning words.


   Xuedou's ode says:


   [Verse 1]


   The clay Buddha does not pass through water.



   [Verse 2]


   The gold Buddha does not pass through the furnace.



   [Verse 3]


   The wood Buddha does not pass through fire.








   


               97 The Diamond Sutra’s Belittled and Despised


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:




   A test is raised for examination:


   Raised:


                  The Diamond Sutra says, “If one becomes a person
   belittled and despised, indeed the person’s previous life’s karma of
   wrongdoing has responded by falling into evil paths.  According to the
   present life, because the person is belittled and despised, the
   previous life’s karma of wrongdoing as a rule becomes extinguished.”


   Xuedou's ode says:



   


                        98  Xiyuan’s Pair of Wrongs


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:




   A test is raised for examination/(to) examine it:


   Raised:


                  Venerable Tianping (Heavenly-peace) at the time of
   traveling on foot called on Xiyuan (Western-courtyard).   [He] always
   said, “Do not say [you] understand Buddha Dharma.  [I] seek a single
   person to raise a saying, and still there is none.”


                  One day Xiyuan, seeing [him] in the distance, called and
   said, “Zongyi” (Tianping’s personal name).

                  Ping raised his head

                  Xiyuan said, “Wrong.” (mistake, blunder, fault)

                  Ping walked three pairs of steps.

                  Xiyuan again said, “Wrong.”

                  Ping neared in front.

                  Xiyuan said, “It is fitting to come to this pair of
   wrongs, but are they Xiyuan’s (i.e., my) wrongs or are they
   Upper-seat’s (i.e., your) wrongs?”

                  Ping said, “Zongyi’s (i.e., my) wrongs.”

                  Xiyuan said, “Wrong.”

                  Ping gave up to go.

                  Xiyuan said, “Just for the time being Upper-seat, pass
   the summer on this other side and [we can] stay together to discuss and
   deliberate this pair of wrongs.”

                  Ping undertook at that time then to walk [on].

                  Afterwards in residence [as abbot] at a Courtyard (i.e.,
   a temple) [he] spoke to the multitude and said, “When I initially
   undertook the time of traveling on foot, because of the working of the
   wind, I arrived at senior elder Siming’s place, and in succession [he]
   let down a pair of ‘wrongs.’  Furthermore, [he wanted] to detain me to
   pass the summer to stay together with me to discuss and deliberate
   [them].  At the time I did not say in that way, ‘Wrong.’  At the time I
   started on foot toward the direction of the South, I knew beforehand to
   say ‘Wrong’ entirely (alt. in the end)!”

                  Ripples/Yi.



   Xuedou's ode says:




   


                 99 The National Teacher Taming and Driving


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


   A test is raised for examination/(to) examine it:


   Raised:


                  Emperor Suzong asked National Teacher Zhong, “So what is
   the ‘The Taming and Driving One’ of the ten bodies [of
   Buddha]?”

                  The National Teacher said, “Patron, the supreme practice
   of surpassing stepping on Vairocana’s crown.”

                  The Emperor said, “[This] solitary person does not
   understand.”

                  The National Teacher said, “[One] never recognizes one’s
   own self’s pure and clear Dharma-body.”



   Xuedou's ode says:




   


                        100  Baling Supports the Moon


   [Yuanwu’s] Appended pointer says:


   A test is raised to examine it:


   Raised:


                  A monk asked Baling. “So what is the ‘Blown Hair
   Sword’?”

                  Ling said. “Branch by branch, the coral is supporting
   the moon.”


